summary section from this month's AAO meta-analysis of the role/effect of CEIOL in various types of glaucoma:

...based on the available data, it seems reasonable to state that for patients with POAG (including NTG) that is controlled with 1 or 2 medications, phacoemulsification alone results in a modest decrease in IOP (~13%) and medication requirement (~12%) and seems to be relatively safe, although some patients (up to 26%) experience worse IOP control after phacoemulsification and may require additional medications, laser treatment, or both. Rarely, incisional glaucoma surgery will be necessary for IOP control within 1 year. The median risk of an IOP spike among the studies reporting on this complication was 17.5%, although definitions of IOP spike and prophylactic treatment to prevent it varied widely. The IOP before surgery is probably the most important factor before surgery associated with IOP after surgery. Interestingly, many of these findings are in agreement with the findings reported among patients with untreated ocular hypertension who underwent phacoemulsification while enrolled in the Ocular Hypertension Treatment Study. In that study, among 63 eyes of 42 patients, the mean reduction in IOP was 17% up to 3 years after phacoemulsification; 11% had an increase in IOP.

For patients with mild to moderate PXG controlled with 1 or 2 medications, phacoemulsification results in a moderate decrease in IOP (~20%) and in the number of medications required after surgery (35%). Although the risk of requiring more medications for IOP control after phacoemulsification was up to 37%, phacoemulsification may be considered for treatment of PXG in patients with a visually significant cataract for whom an IOP spike after surgery would not be considered dangerous, because the risk of the latter is probably higher in PXG (median 21%) than in POAG, although IOP spike definitions and prophylactic treatment varied widely. Limitations of this assessment for patients with PXG are similar to those listed for POAG above, and more studies are necessary for a stronger recommendation.

For patients with chronic PACG controlled with 1 or more medications, phacoemulsification alone results in a substantial decrease (~30%) in IOP and medication use after surgery (~58%). The risk of having worse IOP control is lower (4-9%) than for POAG or PXG. Prospective data show that even in patients with poorly controlled IOP before surgery, phacoemulsification usually results in a marked improvement in IOP and medication requirement, and a relatively small proportion (up to 15-20%) of patients will require incisional glaucoma surgery within 2 years. Notably, the IOP reduction does not seem to be related to the extent of PAS before surgery, but it may be related to angle width. The risk of an IOP spike seems to be less than for POAG or PXG (median, 8%), although IOP spike definitions varied widely. A limitation of the current literature for this patient group is that almost all of these studies originate from 1 region of the world (Southeast Asia). Although the few studies that included patients without prior laser iridotomy did not find a difference in IOP outcomes after phacoemulsification, more studies are needed to confirm this finding.

For patients with acute PACG, phacoemulsification performed soon after initial medical reduction of IOP seems to be highly effective in maintaining reduction of IOP, and most patients did not require medication for IOP control afterward. However, the number of studies and patients on this topic is small, and this is the principal limitation of this assessment. Given the uniformly positive results reported and the relative strength of the evidence (3 of 4 studies were prospective), patients who have had an acute PACG attack and whose IOP has been decreased with medications to a normal level, and who have had improvement in acute inflammation, could be offered phacoemulsification with the possible benefit of reducing the likelihood that chronic PACG would develop in the affected eye. Consideration should be given to complications after surgery commonly seen in eyes with short axial length, shallow anterior chamber depth, and often, relatively dense cataracts. Although these complications, including corneal edema and decompensation, can be vision threatening, for most patients they are not persistent.
