Acute nongranulomatous anterior uveitis (pain, redness, photophobia). More often unilateral, attack over days to weeks, can alternate eyes.

1.  HLA-B27 related diseases (you can test for B27 if the patient has recurrent AUNGAU)

1.1.  Ankylosing spondylitis - back pain, stiffness after inactivity, sacroiliitis on x-ray but lots of B27 diseases have sacroiliitis so it’s not very specific.
1.2.  Reiter syndrome (reactive arthritis) – urethritis, polyarthritis,  conjunctivitis and  sometimes anterior uveitis. Mostly young adult males. Look at palms and soles for keratoderma blennorrhagicum.
1.3.  Inflammatory bowel disease (more uveitis in ulcerative colitis than Crohn disease) – B27 positive patients are more likely to have uveitis and sacroiliitis picture, whereas B27 negative patients are more likely to have scleritis and rheumatoid-arthritis-like symptoms.
1.4.  Psoriatic arthritis – nail pitting and sausage digits. Psoriasis alone doesn’t cause uveitis but psoriatic arthritis does.

2.  Behcet syndrome (an idiopathic occlusive vasculitis that causes anterior uveitis or panuveitis) – hypopyon iritis (often bilateral), mouth and genital ulcers, more likely east of the mediterranean, especially in Japanese patients. Mostly young adults. In men it’s more likely to have posterior involvement with retinal vasculitis. There is a strong association with HLA-B51. Oral prednisone often followed by other immunosuppression. Often refractory and recurrent and can cause blindness from ION and retinopathy.

3.  Glaucomatocyclitic crisis (Posner-Schlossman syndrome) – very rare and should be last on the differential. Mild unilateral iritis with markedly elevated IOP. Treat with topical steroids and pressure drops.

4.  Lens-associated uveitis – autoimmune reaction to lens protein after trauma, surgery or because of hypermature cataract leaking. Can be granulomatous or nongranulomatous but usually has keratic precipitates. If there is a hypopyon postop make sure you’re not dealing with an endophthalmitis. Remove the lens material and give topical steroids.

5.  IOL-associated postoperative inflammation – essentially a continuum of variants of UGH syndrome – more common with ACIOL.

6.  Herpetic disease – usually a keratoiritis with the corneal involvement leading to the anterior uveitis. Zoster can be on the differential even if the skin involvement is long past. Look for diffuse, stellate keratic precipitates (other stellate KP include CMV (a subset of herpes anyway), fuchs heterochromic iridocyclitis (also diffuse), and toxoplasmosis – actually I think any of these can be diffuse). Herpetic uveitis often causes trabeculitis and therefore elevated IOP (unlike most uveitis which causes ciliary body hyposecretion and lower IOP). Retroilluminate to look for patchy or sectoral iris atrophy which is characteristic of herpetic uveitis. Immunocompromised can get viral retinitis. Despite the debate about topical antivirals for corneal disease, it is clear that topicals do nothing for the uveitis. Treat the uveitis piece with topical steroids, cycloplegia (and systemic antivirals if severe).

________________________________________

Chronic anterior uveitis

7.  Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA) – uveitis occurs most often in pauciarticular (4 or fewer joints). Leads to band keratopathy, cataract, synechiae etc. Usually they will get the uveitis within 7-8 years of diagnosis. Often refractory disease requiring you to climb the ladder of immunosuppressives and treat high IOP. Make sure they are controlled for at least 3 months prior to cataract surgery.

7.1.  Type 1 – usually ANA positive girls under 5 (more chronic).
7.2.  Type 2 – usually B27 positive older boys (more acute and recurrent).

8.  Fuchs Heterochromic Iridocyclitis (Fuchs Uveitis Syndrome) – heterochromia is from iris stromal atrophy (dark eyes look lighter, light eyes look darker). Diffuse stellate KP. These patients are asymptomatic and have no synechiae. They often have both AC and anterior vitreous cell and often develop cataracts. Look for abnormal vessels on gonio and elevated IOP. Usually the inflammation doesn’t require treatment.

9.  Idiopathic Iridocyclitis (actually very common not to find a cause).

________________________________________

Intermediate Uveitis

1.  Pars planitis - look for snowballs, snowbanking as indicators of severity. Usually idiopathic (90%) but also can be caused by sarcoid, MS, lyme, toxocara (peripheral), syphilis, TB, Sjogren syndrome and HTLV 1. Distribution is bimodal (5-15, 20-40). Usually bilateral but asymmetric. Can have retinal phlebitis, visual loss from CME (FA useful), more likely to have RD. Treat if 20/40 or worse or CME:

1.1.  Usually PST triamcinolone or methylprednisolone every 2-3 weeks x 4 (watch IOP) – can go to systemic or intravitreal steroids in severe cases.
1.2.  Cryo or laser ablation of  snowbank esp. if NV present.
1.3.  Vitrectomy with laser to snowbank if cryo fails. Separating the posterior hyaloid helps with CME.
1.4.  Systemic immunomodulating agents usually starting with methotrexate and cyclosporine if everything else fails.

2.  Multiple sclerosis (15% of patients with intermediate uveitis are eventually diagnosed with MS). Mild vitritis with periphlebitis. Usually the uveitis itself doesn’t need any treatment.

________________________________________

Posterior Uveitis (floaters, decreased acuity, metamorphopsia, scotomata – retinitis or choroiditis on exam).

Infectious (viral)

1.  Acute retinal necrosis (ARN) – occlusive retinal arteriolitis, vitritis, multifocal yellow-white peripheral retinitis (VZV, HSV 2, EBV, CMV). Usually spares the posterior pole. VERY prone to breaks and RRD/TRD so some do barrier laser. Most patients are not immunosuppressed in ARN but PORN (herpetic) affects late-stage AIDS patients.

1.1.   Intravenous aciclovir x 48 hours before starting steroids for vitritis.
1.2.  Intravitreal ganciclovir may help in AIDS patients.
1.3.  Resolves over 1-2 months with poor acuity.
1.4.  Oral aciclovir x 2-4 months

2.  CMV (neonates, leukemia / lymphoma, immunosuppressed, AIDS) – multifocal brushfire retinitis, hemorrhage, exudate. Minimal overlying vitritis because of immunosuppression. In AIDS usually occurs with CD4 under 50. Don’t bother with serologies because so many people are positive that it’s not diagnostically useful.

2.1.  High dose intravenous ganciclovir or foscarnet x 2 weeks followed by long-term maintenance therapy (oral valganciclovir also an option).
2.2.  Intravitreal ganciclovir (including implant) or foscarnet can be given in addition (or instead if they can’t tolerate intravenous).
2.3.  SIZE of the lesion (look at borders) most important in determining response to therapy.

3.  EBV – retinal lesions during infectious mononucleosis or with positive serology. Treat supportively, possibly add oral aciclovir.

4.  Rubella  - salt and pepper retinitis sometimes with exudative RD seen in congenital, acquired usually causes conjunctivitis, keratitis, iritis more often than retinitis. Measles looks similar but rare because of immunization.

5.  Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) – mutated measles slowly destroys brain and eye. The distinctive eye finding is macular edema evolving into a white infiltrate, sometimes with hemorrhage. No real treatment – fatal.


Infectious (fungal)

6.  Ocular histoplasmosis syndrome (OHS) – disseminated atrophic histo spots, peripapillary pigment changes, and maculopathy characterized by a pigment ring with overlying detachment of the sensory retina and usually hemorrhage. Look for CNV. There is NO vitreous cell. People get the histo spots in adolescence but don’t get the maculopathy (which is what brings them in) until they are middle-aged. There is a geographic association with the Ohio-Mississippi river valley – people inhale spores that go from the lungs to the spleen, liver, and choroid.

7.  Coccidioidomycosis – inhaled spores go to CNS and eye. Rarely causes granulomatous iridocyclitis and multifocal choroiditis.

8.  Cryptococcosis – papilledema, choroiditis, retinitis, uveitis, endophthalmitis in immunocompromised patients. Inhaled spores disseminate to CNS. Culture organism from CSF. Treat with intravenous amphotericin B and oral flucytosine.

9.  Candidiasis – yellow-white retinitis and choroiditis with fluffy borders sometimes with exudation into the vitreous. Can also cause endophthalmitis. Occurs in hospitalized patients with indwelling catheters, hyperalimentation and immunosuppressed.

9.1.  All patients with documented candidemia should have DFE x 2 a couple weeks apart.
9.2.  Treatment is with intravenous, periocular, intraocular amphotericin B, ketoconazole and others. Vitrectomy sometimes needed when infection breaks through into the vitreous.


Infectious (protozoal)

10. Toxoplasmosis – necrotizing retinochoroiditis caused by an intestinal parasite found in cats (oocytes shed in stool, humans ingest tissue cysts full of bradyzoites and they become infectious tachyzoites). Patient complains of unilateral floating spots or blurred vision. Usually the anterior segment is quiet but rarely causes a granulomatous anterior uveitis with high IOP. Typical exam shows a whitish yellow, slightly raised, fuzzy lesion (exudative focal retinitis), often next to a chorioretinal scar. A truly classic case has retinal perivasculitis near the lesion with diffuse venous sheathing and segmental arterial sheathing. Usually in the inner retina but there is an outer retinal variant (PORT). Sometimes there is a lot of vitritis (headlight in the fog), except in PORT which has minimal vitritis.

10.1. Clinched diagnosis requires chracteristic fundus lesions, detection of anti-toxoplasma antibodies in serum (usually an ELISA these days), and exclusion of syphilis, CMV, fungus and other potential infectious diseases.
10.2. Notes on testing – very low antibody titers are still significant if the clinical picture is right (sometimes the standard lab dilutions are too much to pick it up), most US infections are congenital so you’re looking at IgG, but acquired infections will have positive IgM for 2-6 months.
10.3. Observe small lesions in the periphery with normal vision and minimal vitritis, treat anterior uveitis with topical steroids (never without concomitant antiprotozoals, and never give depot injections) and cycloplegia, and treat posterior pole lesions with pyrimethamine (plus folinic acid to help prevent leukopenia) and either sulfadiazine or Bactrim (cheaper and easier to get). Maintenance therapy (Bactrim or doxycycline) is sometimes used (especially in immunosuppressed).


Infectious (helminthic)

11. Toxocariasis – unilateral leukocoria from chronic endophthalmitis with cyclitic membrane, localized granuloma (minimal reaction), or peripheral granuloma. Humans ingest ova that go to liver and lungs and then get disseminated to many organs, including the eye. Serum antibodies show up on ELISA. Corticosteroids can help if there’s active inflammation. Thiabendazole is good for systemic disease but can make the eye worse.

12. Cysticercosis – Mexico, Central America, South America – you can see the cysticercus organism (larva of taenia solium which spread hematogenously from the intestine) in the eye. There is an ELISA to help with diagnosis in unclear cases. Treatment is surgical – praziquantel and laser will kill the larvae but they can worsen the disease because they cause so much inflammation.

13. Diffuse unilateral subacute neuroretinitis (DUSN) – 2 phases: unilateral decrease in acuity with postequatorial crops of white dots with mild vitritis and retinal vasculitis (sometimes you can see the nematode) followed by unilateral wipe-out of RPE, retina, and optic nerve with optic atrophy, extensive pigmentary disruption, and arteriolar attenuation. Treatment is to laser the worm (which does not make the disease worse in this case).

________________________________________

Immunologic (collagen vascular diseases)

14. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) – usually women of childbearing age with keratitis or scleritis (rarely uveitis). Systemic symptoms are fever, arthritis, rash, pleurisy, and oral ulcers – renal disease and neurologic complications are common. The eye is involved in half of cases (usually the retina):

14.1. Cotton wool spots from microvascular disease.
14.2. Vascular occlusion from retinal arteriolitis causes ischemic retina, neovascularization and vitreous hemorrhage.
14.3. Choroidal infarction, choroiditis, subretinal exudation, and choroidal neovascularization.
14.4. Lupus induced hypertension and nephritis can cause arteriolar narrowing, retinal hemorrhage, and disc edema.
14.5. There are 14 criteria – any 4 make the diagnosis – positive ANA is very helpful.
14.6. Involvement of retinal vessels should raise suspicion for cerebral vasculitis.
14.7. Treatment is primarily NSAIDS, steroids, and immunosuppressives, but ischemic retina and neovascularization are treated with PRP.

15. Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) – necrotizing vasculitis in 40-60 year-olds because of immune complex deposition. Patients have fever, arthralgia, and weight loss. Can be fatal because of renal and CNS disease (5 year mortality is 90% but systemic steroids cut this in half). Eye usually has retinal vasculitis with cotton wool spots and hemorrhages. Can have scleritis, iritis, vitritis, CRAO, optic atrophy. Retinal disease responds well to cyclophosphamide, and is also cuts 5 year mortality to 20%.

16. Wegener granulomatosis – granulomatous necrotizing vasculitis (rare, can affect almost any age). Mostly affects respiratory tract. Half of cases have eye involvement, usually proptosis, orbital pseudotumor, and scleritis. Posterior scleritis can cause pain, visual loss, and exudative RD. Occasionally has a retinal vasculitis or true retinitis. 80% 1-year mortality without treatment, but treatment is very effective and reduces mortality to 10%.

16.1. Check ANCA
16.2. Treat with oral steroids and immunosuppresives like cyclophosphamide.


Immunologic (retinochoroidopathies) – blurred vision and scotomata; always exclude  infectious multifocal choroiditis or retinitis.

17. Acute posterior multifocal placoid pigment epitheliopathy (APMPPE) – adolescents and young adults with decreased vision and multiple cream colored, homogeneous lesions beneath the retina (probably at the level of the RPE). They fade over 2-6 weeks and leave behind pigment changes. Often patients have a history of a preceding viral illness. On FA the lesions are hypofluorescent (blocking) but stain late. No treatment – recovery of acuity is variable.

18. Acute retinal pigment epitheliitis (ARPE) – 16-40 year-olds with sudden, unilateral central acuity loss. Exam shows small hyperpigmented lesions in the posterior pole at the level of the RPE (clusters of dots). FA shows a honeycomb pattern of dark centers with hyperfluorescent haloes. No treatment – resolves over 6-12 weeks.

19. Acute zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) – rapid loss of retinal function in several areas of the retina causes peripheral scotomata and photopsias. Exam shows mild vitritis with minimal retinal findings. Diagnosis is clinched by ERG abnormalities. Visual field loss tends to stabilize within 6 months, preserving central acuity. Make sure you’re not dealing with CAR or RP.

20. Birdshot retinochoroidopathy – adults (usually females), 40’s or older with decreased vision, nyctalopia, and disturbance of color vision. Multifocal postequatorial cream-colored lesions throughout the fundus at the level of the RPE. Vitritis is common, and sometimes there is a phlebitis with sheathing. FA shows lots of leakage with perifoveal capillary leakage and CME. ERG is reduced or extinguished. Look for optic nerve edema and CNV. There is a very strong association with HLA-A29. Disease is chronic and recurrent – most effective treatments are periocular steroids and cyclosporine preparations.

21. Multiple evanescent white dot syndrome (MEWDS) – women aged 14-47 with unilateral visual loss and small outer retinal white dots in the posterior pole. Granularity in the macula during the acute phase is pathognomonic. FA shows the wreath sign. ERG shows abnormalities in early amplitudes. Resolves spontaneously in 1-2 months.

22. Punctate inner choroiditis (PIC) – usually myopic women ages 18-37 with bilateral loss of central acuity. Vitreous is quiet but there are small punctate inner choroidal lesions in the posterior pole. On FA lesions block early and stain late. Mild cases clear in 4-6 weeks but some people treat with steroids. Look for CNV. There is a possibility that PIC, MCP, and SFU represent a continuum of one disease.

23. Serpiginous choroidopathy – adults 30-60 with blurred vision. Exam shows a serpiginous or geographic pattern of scars in the fundus. Lesions may be active at the edges, making them yellow-gray and edematous. Old lesions are atrophic. There may be mild vitreous cell. On FA, active areas block choroidal flush. Progression is indolent and proceeds centrifugally, so if it misses the macula prognosis is good. Steroids, cyclosporine and aciclovir have been advocated for macula-threatening disease but they don’t seem very effective.

24. Subretinal fibrosis and uveitis syndrome (SFU) – women ages 14-34 with bilateral vitritis and multifocal choroiditis which later forms stellate subretinal fibrotic lesions. No good treatment (steroids and immunosuppressives sometimes used), poor prognosis.

25. Multifocal choroiditis and panuveitis syndrome (MCP) – bilateral vitritis and small multifocal yellow choroiditis sometimes with peripapillary pigment scarring that looks like a histo scar. Look for CNV or CME. Often chronic. Be certain to exclude TB, sarcoid, syphilis and other white dot syndromes.






________________________________________

Panuveitis (usually paneuveitic conditions are bilateral)

Infectious (bacterial, including spirochetes)

1.  Syphilis – congenital causes acute interstitial keratitis and potentially keratouveitis with intense pain and photophobia. The cornea opacifies with deep vessels that eventually meet in the center, at which point the inflammation subsides and there are ghost vessels remaining. There may be a salt and pepper fundus that can mimic RP. Secondary syphilis (6 weeks to 6 months after primary disease) can cause granulomatous or nongranulomatous anterior uveitis, iris nodules, focal or multifocal choroiditis or retinitis, neuroretinitis, disc edema, retinal vasculitis with exudation and possibly exudative RD. Chorioretinitis should make you suspicious for CSF involvement and neurosyphilis. Look for Argyll-Robertson pupil.

1.1.  Order both nontreponemal tests (VDRL or RPR) plus treponemal tests (FTA-ABS or MHA-TP)
1.2.  VDRL and RPR are only positive with active disease and return to normal after treatment.
1.3.  Order lumbar puncture in any patient with syphilitic uveitis to rule out neurosyphilis.
1.4.  In latent syphilis, VDRL and FTA-ABS are positive, but CSF serology is negative.
1.5.  Treat with intravenous penicillin G, or (if allergic) po doxy or erythromycin. Steroids (by any route) can follow.
1.6.  Examine CSF every 6 months until cell count, protein, and VDRL return to normal.

2.  Lyme disease – stage 1 (first month) rash, follicular conjunctivitis, systemic symptoms (fever, arthralgias). Stage 2 (1-4 months) neurologic disease (bell’s palsy, meningitis, encephalitis), arthritis, eye disease (keratitis, iritis, intermediate uveitis, vitritis, panophthalmitis, possibly optic neuritis), sometimes myocarditis or heart block. Stage 3 (5+ months) atrophic skin changes, chronic arthritis, meningitis, keratitis, sometimes ARDS.

2.1.1.  The most characteristic features of ocular lyme disease are chronic iridocyclitis and vitritis.
2.1.2.  Check lyme titers.
2.1.3.  Assume CNS infection in any patient with ocular lyme and treat aggressively.
2.1.4.  Treat with oral tetracycline, erythromycin or penicillin unless there is clear neurologic disease, in which case use intravenous ceftriaxone or penicillin.

3.  Leptospirosis – humans get leptospira from animals through breaks in the skin or mucous membranes and then it disseminates. Causes anterior uveitis (sometimes with hypopyon), panuveitis, and retinal periphlebitis. More common in plumbers and sewer workers. May cause a positive RPR or FTA-ABS. Treat with intravenous penicillin, po tetracycline or doxycyline.

4.  Tuberculosis – rare except in immigrants or immunosuppressed. TB likes the choroid because it’s highly aerobic and favors oxygenated tissues (like the lungs). Causes both granulomatous and nongranulomatous anterior uveitis, sometimes with keratitis. Can cause yellow-white choroidal nodules, dense vitritis, papillitis, and retinal vasculitis (usually periphlebitis) sometimes with vascular occlusion.

4.1.  The usual picture is chronic or recurrent iritis with accumulation of vitreous opacities and CME.
4.2.  Patients can have eye disease even with low levels of TB, so negative PPD isn’t a perfect rule out (there are stronger PPD’s but I think this is being replaced by quantiferon).
4.3.  Treatment is some combination of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide (steroids can often be added once the patient is on this regimen, but should never be added alone in suspected TB).


Infectious (helminthic)

5.  Onchocerciasis – rare in the USA, usually sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Central and South America. Flies transmit the larvae which disseminate in the body. Adult females release microfilariae that die in the eye and initiate a focal inflammatory response. Treated with annual ivermectin.


Immunologic and granulomatous diseases

6.  Sarcoidosis – nearly half of patients with sarcoid have eye findings (usually uveitis). Sarcoid lesions (tubercles) are made up of Langhans giant cells, epithelioid cells, and a rim of lymphocytes.

6.1.1.  Patients often have orbital and eyelid granulomas, palpebral or bulbar conjunctival nodules, lacrimal gland infiltration (causing dry eye).
6.1.2.  Most sarcoid uveitis is chronic granulomatous iridocyclitis with mutton-fat keratic precipitates, Koeppe and Busacca iris nodules, and snowballs in the anterior inferior vitreous.
6.1.3.  Check for PAS, elevated IOP, and corneal infiltrates. You can also occasionally see granulomas in the retina or the choroid (look especially for granulomas along the venules forming candlewax drippings).
6.1.4.  Check ACE, lysozyme, CXR or possibly chest CT. You can also make the diagnosis by biopsying an enlarged lacrimal gland or a nodule on the conjunctiva or skin.
6.1.5.  Additional ways to make the diagnosis include gallium uptake scan of the head and neck (not reliable if the patient is on steroids), or transbronchial lung biopsy.
6.1.6.  Treat with systemic and topical steroids, cycloplegia, and additional immunosuppressives (methotrexate, azathioprine) if needed.

7.  Sympathetic ophthalmia – bilateral granulomatous panuveitis develops after injury to the exciting eye (starts in the exciting eye and spreads to the sympathizing eye). Theories abound, but as best we can tell, the penetrating injury gives unique ocular antigens access to the lymphatic system. Histopathology shows diffuse granulomatous uveal involvement (with Dalen-Fuchs nodules and granulomatous extension into the disc) and phagocytosis of uveal pigment by epithelioid cells.

7.1.  Patient presents (at least 10 days  after initial injury but most commonly 4-8 weeks later) with redness, mild reduction in acuity and photophobia in the previously unaffected eye. When you look back at the injured or operated (exciting) eye you find a severe panuveitis.
7.2.  The sympathizing eye can have mutton-fat keratic precipitates, nodular infiltration of the iris, PAS, uveal thickening, and papillitis.
7.3.  Treat with steroids (all routes) and cycloplegia – it is debateable whether to remove the exciting eye because depending on the course of the disease it may turn out to be the eye with the better acuity.

8.  Voyt-Koyanagi-Harada disease – rare cause of posterior or diffuse uveitis, usually in Asian or American Indians age 30-50. It’s probably an immune reaction to melanin-associated protein or melanocytes but we don’t know for sure. VKH causes a chronic diffuse uveitis that looks like sympathetic ophthalmia but has no history of surgery or trauma. There are 4 phases:

8.1.  Prodromal - flulike symptoms, sometimes nuchal rigidity or focal neurologic deficits including optic neuropathy. Skin findings like alopecia or vitiligo may be present, and some patients have deafness or tinnitus.
8.2.  Uveitic (a couple days later) – anterior chamber and vitreous cell with exudative retinal detachments (shallow, cloverleaf pattern around the posterior pole). Sometimes the disc is edematous or hyperemic. Acuity can be dramatically affected.
8.3.  Chronic (several weeks in) – detachments resolve and the choroid gradually depigments leaving behind the sunset glow fundus. Depigmented lesions develop in the inferior periphery (resolved Dalen-Fuchs nodules). They can also have peripapillary atrophy. Look for perilimbal vitiligo (Sugiura’s sign – ¾ of patients have it) and extraocular vitiligo, alopecia, and poliosis.
8.4.  Recurrent (usually only occurs if the initial disease was not adequately treated) – recurrent granulomatous anterior uveitis with KP, posterior synechiae, iris nodules, iris depigmentation, and stromal atrophy. Visual loss is usually from cataract and glaucoma but they can also get CNV.
8.5.  FA shows early focal areas of  subretinal leakage and late pooling in the areas of serous retinal detachment (a really distinct picture). Ultrasound can help you see thickened choroid. LP can show lymphocytosis in unclear cases.
8.6.  Treat with steroids (all routes), cycloplegia, and additional immunosuppresion if needed.

________________________________________

Endophthalmitis

Postoperative

1.  Acute onset postoperative endophthalmitis

1.1.  Mild acute postop cases may present as late as 7-14 days postop – usually caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis or other coagulase negative staph.
1.2.  Severe acute postop cases (20/400 or worse with significant pain) usually presents within 4 days of surgery (marked vitritis often obscures fundus details) – usually Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus, and gram negatives like Serratia Marcescens, Proteus, and Pseudomonas.

2.  Chronic or delayed onset postoperative endophthalmitis (minimal pain, mild vitritis, decent vision – at least 4 weeks postop).

2.1.  Chronic bacterial postop endophthalmitis is most often P acnes or S epidermidis – S epidermidis presents within 6 weeks of surgery with nongranulomatous inflammation, P acnes presents 2 months to 2 years after surgery and classically has granulomatous keratic precipitates, a small hypopyon, a white plaque on the capsular bag, and vitritis.
2.2.  Chronic fungal postop endophthalmitis is most often Candida (usually starts within 3 months of surgery).

3.  Endophthalmitis in patients with filtering blebs can occur at any time. It is usually caused by Strep, S epidermidis, H influenzae, Moraxella, and Enterococcus. If a patient has a thin cystic bleb and you think there may be a blebitis, you must always make sure that there is no hypopyon or vitritis indicating that they really have an endophthalmitis.


Posttraumatic

4.  Posttraumatic endophthalmitis is most often S epidermidis or Bacillus species (like B cereus – very fulminant). Sometimes it can be caused by Strep, S aureus or fungi. Look for hypopyon, vitritis, and retinal periphlebitis in patients who have had a recent penetrating injury – try to remove IOFB within 24 hours if possible to reduce the risk of infection.


Endogenous endophthalmitis

5.  Endogenous endophthalmitis has acute onset with pain, decreased vision, hypopyon and vitritis – it is common in chronically ill patients like diabetics or patients in renal failure, immunosuppressed patients, people with indwelling catheters, IV drug users, or patients in the immediate postoperative or postpartum period. Any infected organ can spread to the eye (endocarditis, pyelonephritis, meningitis, osteomyelitis etc.).

5.1.  Almost any organism that can infect the body can cause endogenous endophthalmitis, but the most common bacteria are Streptococcus (endocarditis), S aureus (cutaneous infections), Bacillus (IV drug users) and some gram negatives like Neisseria meningiditis, H influenzae, E coli, and Klebsiella.
5.2.  Endogenous fungal endophthalmitis is usually Candida but can be Aspergillus – look for keratic precipitates, hypopyon, vitritis, and focal or multifocal chorioretinitis (the chorioretinitis is how the fungal infection usually begins, and then it breaks out into the vitreous). Fungal endogenous endophthalmitis is more common in those on hyperalimentation, IV drug users, patients with indwelling catheters, and immunosuppressed patients.
5.3.  Be sure to get blood cultures and appropriate systemic workup if the cause of the endogenous endophthalmitis is not known.


Diagnosis and treatment

6.  The most helpful distinguishing characteristic of true infectious endophthalmitis (as opposed to keratitis or uveitis presenting with hypopyon, etc.) is that the vitritis is progressive and out of proportion to the anterior segment findings.

6.1.  If possible, obtain both aqueous (0.1 mL) and vitreous (0.2 mL) specimens for culture (sometimes one is positive and the other is not). Plate on blood agar, Sabouraud’s agar, chocolate agar, and thioglycollate broth.
6.2.  Endophthalmitis vitrectomy study – if better than light perception you can tap and inject, for light perception or worse you should vitrectomize. After a year of follow up, half of patients were 20/40 or better.
6.3.  Usually empiric intravitreal antibiotics would include vancomycin plus an aminoglycoside (gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin), but some people cover gram negatives with a third generation cephalosporin like ceftazidime because of reports of retinal toxicity (including macular infarction) from aminoglycosides. For fungal infection usually they use intravitreal amphotericin B.
6.4.  Keep in mind that for endogenous endophthalmitis you also need to treat the systemic infection that is the source of the bug.



________________________________________

Masquerade syndromes

Nonneoplastic masquerade syndromes

1.  Retinitis pigmentosa – can look like uveitis because of vitreous cell and cystoid macular edema. Usually retinitis pigmentosa will have a family history, which can help you tell the difference, and the patient almost always complains of nyctalopia. The exam (bilateral, waxy disc pallor, attenuated arterioles, bone spicules) and the ERG (severely depressed or extinguished) can help you confirm the diagnosis.

2.  Ocular ischemic syndrome – patient has decreased vision and mild ocular pain. Exam shows corneal edema, anterior chamber cells, flare out of proportion to the number of cells, sometimes iris or angle neovascularization. The vitreous is usually clear but the retina can show dilated or tortuous venules, neovascularization, and blot hemorrhages in the periphery. Fluorescein angiography shows delayed filling and capillary nonperfusion. Carotid doppler shows stenosis (so of course you want to think about this condition in people who are old enough that they could have stenosis).

3.  Chronic peripheral rhegmatogenous retinal detachment – these patients can have anterior chamber cell and flare, and cystoid macular edema. The photoreceptor outer segments can float in the anterior chamber and look like cell. If the photoreceptor outer segments are phagocytosed by trabecular meshwork endothelial cells then the patient can develop secondary open angle glaucoma (Schwarz syndrome).

4.  Nocardia asteroides disease – a potentially lethal systemic disease characterized by pneumonia and disseminated abscesses. Usually presents as one or multiple choroidal abscesses.

5.  Endogenous fungal endophthalmitis

5.1.  Candida endophthalmitis – especially in the immunosuppressed, IV drug users, patients on hyperalimentation. Spreads by metastasis to the choroids. Be careful because it can look like toxoplasmic choroiditis (yellow-white, fluffy border choroidal lesions. The key to diagnosis is blood cultures positive for candida but it can also show up on PCR of intraocular fluids. Anyone with candidemia should get two dilated fundus exams two weeks apart. The most common intraocular agents used for treatment are amphotericin B and ketoconazole, but keep in mind that they will need systemic therapy also.
5.2.  Aspergillus flavus and fumigatus endophthalmitis – especially in immunosuppressed patients, patients with severe chronic pulmonary disease, and IV drug users. It is particularly common in liver transplant patients. Exam shows a confluent yellowish infiltrate in the macula within the choroids and subretinal space, sometimes with a subretinal or subhyaloidal hypopyon (there may be an anterior chamber hypopon as well). Sometimes there is retinal hemorrhage, vascular occusion or necrosis, and the macular lesion often heals to form an atrophic scar. Be sure to rule out candida, CMV, toxoplasma, coccidioidomycosis and bacterial endophthalmitis. Treat aggressivelywith vitrectomy and amphotericin B. Poor visual prognosis.
5.3.  Ocular coccidioidomycosis – usually causes pulmonary and disseminated disease that can involve the CNS. It is very rare in the eye, and most often presents as a conjunctivitis, but it can have almost any manifestation from anterior uveitis to chorioretinitis. Sometimes it forms an iris granuloma. Be sure to rule out the more common pathogens like candida, aspergillus, and histoplasma. Treat with intravenous amphotericin B and supplement with intravitreal if needed. Poor visual prognosis. Just keep in mind that although many fungi can cause endogenous endophthalmitis, the big two are candida and aspergillus.


Neoplastic masquerade syndromes

Lymphoid malignancies

6.  Primary central nervous system lymphoma – almost always non-Hodgkin B cell lymphomas, usually patients in their 50’s and 60’s with involvement of the vitreous, retina, or sub RPE who complain of visual loss or floaters. Exam shows variable amounts of vitritis (sometimes with anterior chamber spillover), and creamy yellow subretinal infiltrates with overlying RPE detachments. These lesions can mimic acute retinal necrosis, toxoplasmosis, frosted branch angiitis, or retinal arteriolar obstruction. Look for behavioral changes, paresis, seizures, cerebellar signs, and cranial nerve palsies.

6.1.  Fluorescein angiography may show blockage from subretinal infiltrates, window defect from resolved areas of inflammation, or both (leopard spot pattern).
6.2.  MRI can show periventricular lesions, and CSF analysis sometimes shows lymphoma cells, but the best diagnostic test for those with ocular involvement and vitritis is vitreous biopsy (1 mL vitreous in 3 mL tissue culture medium).
6.3.  Prognosis is poor, with median survivals of 6-36 months reported, even with treatment options including surgical removal of CNS lesions, chemotherapy, radiotherapy (radiation is not used in patients over 60 because of CNS toxicity), intravenous and intrathecal methotrexate (sometimes injected locally for ocular involvement).
6.4.  Rarely a systemic lymphoma can spread hematogenously to the choroid, but this is unusual.

7.  Leukemia – retinal findings include intraretinal hemorrhages, cotton wool spots, white-centered hemorrhages, microaneurysms, and peripheral neovascularization. Occasionally leukemic cells may invade the vitreous and cause a pseudovitritis or a pseudohypopyon.

8.  Uveal lymphoid proliferations – ranging from benign reactive uveal lymphoid proliferations to frank lymphoma can present as gradual painless visual loss (unilateral or bilateral) associated with multifocal creamy choroidal lesions that can mimic sarcoid or birdshot. Other less common presentations include cystoid macular edema, painful anterior uveitis, or elevated IOP secondary to infiltration of angle structures by lymphocytes. Be sure to rule out posterior scleritis and uveal effusion syndrome.


Nonlymphoid malignancies

9.  Uveal melanoma – 5% of patients present with episcleritis, uveitis, or endophthalmitis.

10. Retinoblastoma – 1% have the relatively rare variant called diffuse infiltrating retinoblastoma, which is tough to diagnose because of poor fundus visibility and lack of calcifications. They sometimes have chemosis, white pseudohypopyon, or vitritis. If you’re going to perform needle biopsy, keep in mind that tumor can spread through the needle tract.

11. Juvenile xanthogranuloma – a histiocytic process affecting mostly the skin and eyes. Patients present before age 1 with reddish yellow skin lesions. Histopathology of the lesions shows foamy histiocytes and Touton giant cells. Ocular involvement is usually in the form of iris nodules.

12. Metastatic tumors – in adults, metastases are the most common intraocular malignancies, especially lung cancer and breast cancer. Choroidal metastases can be accompanied by vitritis, serous retinal detachment, and sometimes cystoid macular edema. Choroidal metastases are often bilateral and multifocal. Anterior uveal metastases are also possible. Retinal metastases are extremely rare, but can happen in patients with cutaneous melanoma (most common), lung cancer, gastrointestinal cancer, and breast cancer. Metastatic melanoma causes little brown spherules in the retina, while other metastases are yellow-white with perivascular sheathing (like a retinal vasculitis). Vitreous biopsy can be helpful if cells are present.

13. Bilateral diffuse uveal melanocytic proliferation – rapid vision loss in the context of systemic malignancy. Exam shows pigmented and nonpigmented placoid iris and choroidal nodules and serous retinal detachments. Be sure to rule out VKH. Interestingly, the histopathology shows infiltration of the uveal tract by benign spindle shaped cells, and the connection between this and the cancer is unknown. Treat the primary lesion, there is nothing to do for the eye specifically.


________________________________________

Ocular involvement in AIDS

1.  Key CD4 susceptibility landmarks

1.1.  CD4 counts under 500 are associated with oral candidiasis, Kaposi sarcoma, lymphoma, and herpes zoster ophthalmicus.
1.2.  CD4 counts under 200 are associated with disseminated tuberculosis (remember that the PPD is notoriously unreliable in HIV patients), pneumocystosis, and toxoplasmosis.
1.3.  CD4 counts under 100 are associated with cytomegalovirus and Mycobacterium avium complex.

2.  HIV retinopathy – the most common ocular finding in patients with AIDS (more than half of cases). Characterized by retinal hemorrhages, microaneurysms, and cotton wool spots.

3.  Cytomegaloviris retinitis – the most common opportunistic ocular infection in patients with AIDS (sometimes the presenting sign of AIDS). Generally occurs with CD4 counts below 50. CMV infects many people but is only a significant cause of morbidity in immunocompromised patients. Exam shows full-thickness retinal opacification associated with hard exudates and hemorrhages. There is usually minimal overlying vitritis because the patients are immunosuppressed. Sometimes the presentation is less edematous and more granular, with minimal hemorrhage. A third presentation can have periphlebitis that mimics frosted branch angiitis.

3.1.  Serology is of limited value because almost everyone has been exposed (and immunosuppressed patients have a poor antibody response). Many immunosuppressed patients are colonized, so even if you culture the virus it doesn’t guarantee that this is the diagnosis. Diagnosis is usually just history and exam.
3.2.  Treatment
3.2.1.  Ganciclovir - intravenous (the mainstay of therapy), oral, or intravitreal (injection or implant). Causes myelosuppression.
3.2.2.  Foscarnet – intravenous (the mainstay of therapy) or intravitreal injection. Causes renal dysfunction and electrolyte abnormalities.
3.2.3.  Other options include intravenous cidofovir or oral valganciclovir.
3.2.4.  Response to treatment is determined by change in the size of the lesion, along with the degree of  “activity” of the lesion (retinal whitening, hemorrhage at the border).
3.2.5.  Monitor these patients closely, they can develop atrophic holes and subsequent retinal detachment, and relapses of the retinitis are the rule. Most patients need to be on chronic anti-CMV therapy in addition to HAART.

4.  Progressive outer retinal necrosis (PORN) – a rare infection in HIV infected patients caused by herpes simplex or herpes zoster. Can look like CMV or ARN but is more rapidly progressive than CMV and has relatively little vitreous inflammation compared to ARN. Commonly bilateral, with high incidence of retinal detachment. Treatment is with intravenous aciclovir and intravitreal ganciclovir or foscarnet but prognosis is poor.

5.  Toxoplasma retinochoroiditis – in immunocompromised patients, the disease is more often bilateral, lesions are bigger, vitritis over the lesion is less than usual. AIDS patients tend not to have the classic toxo scars to help you diagnose toxoplasmosis. This is probably because the toxoplasma is acquired, rather than reactivation of congenital disease. In AIDS patients toxoplasma can infect the brain so sometimes they need an MRI. Treat with pyramethamine, sulfadiazine, and clindamycin. Avoid steroids if possible. Continue antitoxoplasmic therapy for life in these patients.

6.  Syphilitic chorioretinitis – uveitis, optic neuritis, and retinitis, sometimes with associated dermatologic and CNS manifestations. In AIDS patients, the exam shows large bilateral pale-yellow subretinal lesions that are solitary and placoid with overlying vitritis. Usually the center of the lesion has faded and  the RPE shows stippled hyperpigmentation. Treat with intravenous penicillin G.

7.  Pneumocystis carinii choroiditis – occurs rarely after dissemination in a patient with PCP pneumonia. Elevated plaque-like yellow-white choroidal lesions with minimal overlying vitritis. Fluorescein angiography shows the lesions to be hypofluorescent early and hyperfluorescent late. Order CXR, ABG, LFT’s, and abdominal CT. Treat inpatient with intravenous trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole. Over 1-4 months the lesions will disappear.

8.  Multifocal choroiditis can also result from dissemination of cryptococcus neoformans, M tuberculosis, or atypical mycobacteria. The message is that multifocal choroiditis in an AIDS patient is alarming and should prompt an exhaustive workup for systemic infection.


External eye manifestations in patients with AIDS

9.  Ocular adnexal Kaposi sarcoma – Kaposi sarcoma is aggressive in AIDS patients,  disseminating to visceral organs. 20% of AIDS patients with Kaposi sarcoma will have involvement of the ocular adnexa. Histopathology shows spindle cells and vascular spaces full of erythrocytes. Treatment is usually with excision and cryo or radiation.

10. Molluscum contagiosum – caused by a DNA poxvirus. Can be numerous and bilateral in AIDS patients. Treatment is surgical excision, sometimes with cryotherapy.

11. Herpes zoster – if a young healthy patient presents with herpes zoster lesions on the face or eyelids, they should be tested for HIV.




