// https://github.com/dustypomerleau/eye-notes

AHMED GLAUCOMA VALVE PLACEMENT

Supplies
1 x 7-0 Vicryl on Spatula needle  Clear Cornea Retraction Suture
1 x 8-0 Silk on Cutting or 5-0 Mercilene  Used for anterior suture holes
1 x 10-0 Nylon on cutting Secures tube to sclera
Ahmed Filter
Scleral patch graft   Order from Northern Cal Tissue Bank
23 Guage straight needle

1.  Preop antibiotics polytrim or fluoroquin q 1hr, betadine x 2 min preoperatively
2.  Retrobulbar anesthesia
3.  Cataract prep and drape
4.  Wire or PKP speculum
5.  Corneal 7-0 Vicryl traction suture placed inferiorly to allow view of AC
6.  Superotemporal peritomy b/t SR and LR with radial relaxing incisions at edges.  Watch out for superior rectus muscle
7.  Stevens tenotomy scissors to bluntly dissect scleral surface for fit of valve
8.  Cautery hemostasis
9.  ** Flush valve to assure patency with 27 G needle
10. Check fit of valve by passing into subtenons space
11. Pass 5-0 mercilene (or 8-0 silk) into anterior suture holes in implant.  2 interrupted ties.  Place posterior to limbus about 10 mm and suture in place with episcleral bites.  Make sure tube is pointing radially. (May place valve 6 mm from limbus, esp superonasally: AO 1996,114:223, Leen & Witkop)
12. Paracentesis with viscoelastic into AC.  Place nasally to allow future entry if needed
13. Cut tube, bevel up, about 3-4mm past limbus
14. 23 G entry paracentesis at limbus, parallel to iris and in line with natural lie of tube.  Introduce tube with Kellman-McPherson and pass into AC
15. Tack down tube along exposed sclera with 10-0 or 9-0 nylon in straddling fashion
16. Suture scleral graft onto exposed sclera with interrupted 10-0 nylon, secured at limbal corners and along anterior Ahmed margin
17. Close conjunctiva at corners with 10-0 nylon, slightly covering cornea.  Burried knots.
Subconj antibiotics tobra/ancef/dexamethasone

• post-op antibiotics, but steroids not really needed
• expected post-operative IOP 15-20


//


PREOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:
Bilateral upper eyelid dermatochalasis

POSTOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:
SAME

OPERATION:
Bilateral upper eyelid blepharoplasty

ANESTHESIA:
Monitored Anesthesia Care with Local

COMPLICATIONS:
None

INDICATIONS:
Patient has history of bilateral upper eyelid dermatochalasis blocking vision and interfering with daily activities.  Risks, benefits, and alternatives were fully discussed, and the patient wished to proceed with surgery.


PROCEDURE:
Following a routine preoperative clearance, patient was brought to the operating room.  The upper eyelid creases were marked.  Pinch technique was used to mark the excess upper eyelid skin.  Under intravenous sedation and monitoring, local anesthesia consisting of 50/50 mixture of 2% Lidocaine with epinephrine and 0.75% marcaine was injected into both upper eyelids.  Patient was then prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion.  #15 blade was used to make the skin incision.  Monopolar cautery was used to excise the skin muscle flap.  Careful cautery hemostasis was achieved.  Orbital septum was entered to expose the preaponeurotic fat pads.  Excess fat pad was removed and shrunken back using monopolar cautery.  Careful hemostasis was achieved.  Skin edges were apposed using 6-0 prolene suture in a running fashion.  Antibiotic ointment was applied to the surgical sites.  Same procedure was performed for both upper eyelids.

Patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications.  Patient was brought to the recovery area in stable condition.


//


Canthotomy/Cantholysis/Canthoplasty/Lateral Tarsal Strip

Key points:
• Must release LCT from orbital septum
• Must place LCT high enough and posterior enough
Sutures:
1 x 5-0 Ophthalon, D-2 needle, double armed
1 x 6-0 Dexon, P-2 needle, for subcutaneous closure (Highland = pre-1 needle)
1 x 6-0 Fast Absorbing Plain gut, P-1 needle
Alta Bates has 5-0 Ophthalon on D-1 double armed needle.

 Indication: ectropion, entropion
 Pre-op: Assess lid position, determine if lateral surgery adequate. ?malar prominence or Polar bear maxilla?
1.   Patient in room.
2.   Local anesthesia with lido + epi + marcaine.  Inject to periosteum
3.   “Prep  both sides of face” and scrub
4.  #15 blade for infraciliary incision, extend to skin overlying periosteum, 15mm Lynch incision.  The orbital rim may be exposed with cutting cautery.   Consider leaving this soft tissue intact and passing needle through tissue, using needle to feel rim.
5.  Inferior cantholysis, Stevens scissors cutting inferiorly
6.  Free up inferior tarsal border by cutting lid retractors laterally; assess positioning of new lateral margin
7.  Excise cilia with Westcott scissors
8.  Remove skin from margin to inferior tarsal border medially as needed
9.  Scrape lid margin epithelium and conjunctiva with Stevens or Barc-Parker blade.
10. Hemostasis with foot-controlled bovey
11. G-1 reverse cutting needle with Dermalon/Dexon/Ophthalon,  Double needle.  Pass posterior to anterior on tarsus, then pass within the orbital rim, tie four throws.
12. Close superior division of lateral canthal tendon to tarsus to further support tarsus and provide more lid support.  6.0 Dexon
13. Close skin with 6.0 fast absorbing gut
14. Bandage with Tefla, fluffs, Tdex drops to wound, gtts bd

• follow up day one, one week, one month
• ice packs first two days, then heat

  Jelk Approach through upper lid incision
1.  From blepharoplasty or ptosis incision, in cases where 10mm tightening adequate
2.  From lateral margin of lid incision, blunt dissect sub-orbicularis to orbital rim laterally
3.  Grasp lateral canthal tendon retinaculum with 0.5 Castroviejo forceps.  Use this to verify tendon has been located.
4.  Cut insertion with Stevens scissors
5.  Verify disinsertion with forceps
6.  Judge postitioning of tendon. May need to resect few mm of tendon , or may require freeing up inferior canthal margin using scissors
7.  Secure tendon to periosteum with 5.0 ophthalon as above
8.  Reinforce with 6.0 Dexon as needed
9.  Close lid incision


//


ECCE + IOL

Key points:
• Correct eye
• Correct IOL.  Double check and place IOL calculations next to lens selection to verify
Suture:
• 10-0 Nylon on TG-140 or TG-160 cutting needle
• optional: 4-0 silk bridal suture
• optional: no suture if wound constructed well and self-sealing

1.  Pre-op prep with flurbiprofen 0.03%, Tropicamide 1%, Phenylephrine 2.5%, Neosporin all given 3 times
2.  Retrobulbar anesthesia.  Gloves, alcohol, drop of tetracaine on cornea
• 3-5 cc 2% Lidocaine, 0.75% Marcaine, 150 units Wydase.  25 G 1 1/2" needle (or Atkinson needle)
• or 2% lidocaine only
3.  Set up microscope, chair, wrist rests. In obese people, consider reverse Trendelenberg to decrease positive pressure.  Microscope pedels left foot.  IA right foot.
4.  Prep eye with Povidone-Iodide 5% (2 ggts betadine in 10cc); scrub during prep
5.  Drape with occlusive drape, stick end of cotton tip applicator (dry lids well to grab lashes with adhesive). Single cut in mid-portion of drape with relaxing mid-upper cut.
6.  Open loop wire speculum
7.  Peritomy with blunt westcott, colibri.  Smooth cut at edge of limbus
8.  Cautery hemostatis with wetfield, dry for groove
9.  Groove: #69 (full) blade, 0.12 pickups to stabilize, one motion, 1/3-1/2 depth, 10 mm long and 2mm recessed from limbus
10. Shelf: Angled crescent or #69 Beaver into clear cornea with heel down for tangential shelf; forceps on anterior lip or side of wound to stabilize globe.  Don’t hack, attempt single-plane, continuous pressure cuts
11. Enter AC with 2.8 mm to 3.2 mm keratome blade.  Avoid stripping Descemet’s by elevating heel of blade, but don’t violate anterior capsule (gentle wobble of blade helps)
12. Viscoelastic to AC: fill through paracentesis port in cross-lens technique to evacuate aqueous
13. Can opener style capsulotomy with cystitome needle, loaded on Vicoelastic
14. Rock nucleus with capsulotomy needle, L to R, R to L, 6 to 12, 12 to 6 lastly
15. Widen sclerocorneal wound with left and right going corneal scissors
16. Lens loop left hand, pointed instrument left hand, gentle steady pressure to 6 O’clock position, may have assistant lift corneal wound.
17. Once lens delivered, place 2 x shaped 10-0 sutures at 10:30 and 1:30 (6 mm apart)
18. I/A: never take pedel off position 1.  Reach under capsular edge before aspirating.  Ask for IOL
19. Viscoelastic: fill AC, especially bag
20. Place IOL: long axis of forceps parallel with long axis of haptics.  Use Kelman McPherson forceps to place trailing haptic by pronating hand
21. Remove viscoelastic with IA for about 20 sec.  Push IOL back to release all
22. Reform AC with BSS and place miotic agent
23. Close wound with central X-shaped 10-0 nylon, burrying knot
24. Check wound
25. Conjunctiva will close naturally without cautery, but may close with forceps cautery.
26. Antibiotics: 100 mg Ancef, 2 mg dexamethasone, +/- Vanco, balloon conj over wound.  Note: these can be given at start of case

• If trabeculectomy exists, then inject 5mg 5-FU 180° from bleb repeated x 3 days
• post-op neosporin or Cipro or Polytrim + Pred Forte
• shield at night for three weeks, glasses during day
• endophthalmitis warning


//


Temporal (Topical) Clear Cornea Phaco + IOL

Key points:
• Correct eye
• Correct IOL.  Double check and place IOL calculations next to lens selection to verify.
Suture:
• optional 10-0 Nylon on TG-140: no suture if wound constructed well and self-sealing

1.  Pre-op prep with flurbiprofen 0.03%, Tropicamide 1%, Phenylephrine 2.5%, Neosporin all given 3 times
2.  Anesthesia.  Gloves, alcohol, drop of tetracaine on cornea
• 3-5 cc 2% Lidocaine, 0.75% Marcaine, 150 units Wydase.  25 G 1 1/2" needle (or Atkinson needle)
• or 2% lidocaine only
• or topical anesthesia: 0.75% Marcaine, 2 drops preoperatively q 5 min, 0.5 cc non-preserved 2% lidocaine intracamerally after paracentesis
3.  Set up microscope, chair, wrist rests. In obese people, consider reverse Trendelenberg to decrease positive pressure.  Microscope pedels left foot.  Phaco Right foot.
4.  Prep eye with Povidone-Iodide 5% (2 ggts betadine in 10cc); scrub during prep
5.  Drape with occlusive drape, stick end of cotton tip applicator (dry lids well to grab lashes with adhesive). Single cut in mid-portion of drape with relaxing mid-upper cut.
6.  Open loop wire speculum
7.  Paracentesis: 15° microsharp, 50-90° to left of main incision (left handed surgeons make paracentesis to right)
8.  Viscoelastic to AC: fill through paracentesis port in cross-lens technique to evacuate aqueous
9.  Enter AC with 2.8 mm keratome blade.  Avoid stripping Descemet’s by elevating heel of blade, but don’t violate anterior capsule (gentle wobble of blade helps with resistance from cotton tip swab or Thornton Fixation Ring)
10. Capsulotomy: cystitome needle, loaded on Vicoelastic. +/- Eutradas.  Refill AC as needed to prevent radialization of capsular tear
11. Hydrodissect: 27G or bigger, first J then straight canula
12. Sculpt lens: 70% power, 20 cc flow rate, 50 mmHg vacuum
• divide and conquer most reliable, but consider cracking as you go; use cyclodialysis spatula as second instrument (others = ball tip, chopper, Y-shaped tip)
13. Quadrant removal: 70% power, 20 cc flow, 150 mmHg vacuum
• keep spatula posterior to quadrant to protect posterior capsule
14. I/A: never take pedel off position 1.  Reach under capsular edge before aspirating.  Ask for IOL
15. Viscoelastic: fill AC, especially bag
16. Widen wound with premeasured blade, or freehand to appropriate size (2-8 to 3.5 mm)
17. Fold/load IOL
18. Place IOL: long axis of forceps parallel with long axis of haptics. Haptic close to capsule, dial into bag with Lester Pusher, Sinskey Hook, or place trailing haptic with KM forceps by pronating hand
19. Remove viscoelastic with IA for about 20 sec.  Push IOL back to release all
20. Reform AC with BSS, note disappearance of posterior capsule haptic-induced folds with appropriate fill
21. +/- Miotics : Needed if can-opener style or large rhexis
22. Check wound closure with Weck cell sponge
23. Antibiotics: 100 mg Ancef, 2 mg dexamethasone, +/- Vanco, place deeply away from vessels to avoid bleeding.  Note: these can be given at start of case
24. +/- Patch, ointment.  If topical, demonstrate vision and start drops now.

• If trabeculectomy exists, then inject 5mg 5-FU 180° from bleb repeated x 3 days
• post-op neosporin or Cipro or Polytrim + Pred Forte
• shield at night for three weeks, glasses during day
• endophthalmitis warning


//


Dacryocystorhinostomy

4 x 4-0 Silk, P-1, for muscularis exposure
1 x 4-0 Silk Tie, for tying tubes at nares
1 x 4-0 Chromic Gut, D-2, mucosal flaps or 5-0 Polyglactan 910 suture, P-2
1 x 6-0 Dexon, P-2, subcutaneous tissue closure
1 x 6-0 Fast Absorbing Plain Gut, P-1, skin closure
1 x 5-0 Ophthalon, (monofilament nylon), D-2, tying tubes within DCR

Plastic Surgery Tray, suction, foot control bovie (cut and coag),
Headlights and Loupes
Corneal protector, muscle hook
1/2 inch gauze, 12” for nose
4% cocaine solution
Two 10 cc syringes with local anesthetic preparation on table, 27G 1 1/4”
Hall Bone Drill with 3mm round burr
Kerrison Punch, Lembert Rongeurs
Jackson Lacrimal Probes with silicone tubing attached
Punctal Dilator (Bowman Probes Optional)
Right angle 69 Beaver
Instat, collagen pads.  Gel Foam
Bayonet Forceps
Jackson-Pratt Stent
Senn Rake retractor


1.  IV sedation or General Anesthesia.  Reverse Trendelenberg
2.  Local, 2% Lido, 0.5% Marc with Epi.  5-7 cc to medial canthal region and to periosteum
3.  Pack nasal passage, near middle meatus, with 4% cocaine soaked 1/2" nu gauze
4.  Loupes & Headlight.  Instruct Nurse “scrub whole face to chin.”  Scrub
5.  Drape the face, leaving mouth covered only by moist gauze.
6.  Dilate and probe.  If stenosed puncta, plan punctoplasty ± canaliculoplasty after probes partially placed.
7.  Mark the incision. 11 mm medial to MCT, 15-20mm inferiorly to nasal ala starting at level of MCT
8.  #15 Bard Parker Blade, then Stevens scissors to nasal bone.  Bovie cautery, foot control
9.  Incise with #15 blade while assistant provides traction.  Angular vessels 8mm nasal to MCT
10. Blunt dissect with Stevens scissors to bone. Watch angular artery/vein.  Asst to use long end of rake retractor over vessel.  Use whole extent of skin incision for exposure.
11. Bovie Cautery coag/foot
12. Freer or Tenzel(combo Freer and Coddle) Periosteal elevator to clear away region from inf margin of MCT, anterior lacrimal crest, inferiorly about 10mm, anteriorly about 5 mm, and under the lacrimal sac.
13. Place 1/2 x 1/2 Cocaine soaked neural Pattie in lacrimals sac fossa. (Don’t forget it later!)
14. Place 4 4.0 silk sutures in muscularis cutting and clamping the tags to the cloth drape around the eye.
15. Bone drill.  Start on nasal bone and create groove until red mucosa seen.  Kerrison and Lambert rongeurs to enlarge bony osteotomy to 1x1cm (enough to create flaps), incl. post. extent of lacrimal fossa (to the anterior ethmoidal air cells), supeiorly to medial canthal tendon (the level of the common cannaliculus).  Asst to remove bone with wet 4x4.  Irrigate after each bone drilling effort.  Don’t touch skin or 4x4 with drill.  Inferior extent to site of NLD to avoid sump
16. Lido with epi on 27G 1.5" needle to whiten nasal mucosa.
17. Intubate canaliculae with Jackson lacrimal probes attached to silicone tubing.
18. Open lacrimal sac with right angle blade.  Extend with Westcott scissors  (± extensive scarring in lacrimal sac and in canalicular system)
19. Open nasal mucosa with right angle blade and Westcott scissors.  Fashion nasal flaps in an H formation.  The incision is vertical to the patient
20. Anastomose posterior nasal and lacrimal flaps with 2 interrupted 4.0 chromic sutures.  Need non-locking long needle holder.  Make sure pattie has been removed by this time.
21. Pass probes into middle meatus, retrieve with straight hemostats, clamping right at end of probes, and pushing at same time from the punctal side.  Don’t tear mucosa!
22. Tie tubes to each other, further secure with 4-0 silk tie.  Further secure in the common cannalicular region with 5-0 ophthalon suture.
23. Separate anterior and posterior nasal flaps with Cocaine-soaked Instat
24. Complete anterior flap anastomosis with 2 interrupted 4-0 chromic sutures
25. Close subcutaneous and skin with three 6-0 Vicryls and running or interrupted 6-0 Fast absorbing plain gut suture.
26. Remove corneal protector with muscle hook.
27. Steri strips, telfa pad and fluffed gauze to soak up some blood.  Pack nose with cotton ball.  NO OINTMENTS.


//


TORIC template 4-2009
Preoperative Diagnosis:
Cataract, @ eye.

Postoperative Diagnosis:
Cataract, @ eye.

Operation:
Kelman phacoemulsification, posterior chamber intraocular lens, temporal clear cornea,  @ eye.

Surgeon:
Assistant:    @

Anesthesia:  Local with mac

Indications:
@ is a @ year old @ with a history of decreased vision in the @ eye secondary to cataract interfering with activities of daily living.

Complications:  None

Procedure:
Tetracaine eye drops were placed in the patient's eye in the holding area.  The 0 and 180 axis was marked.  The patient was brought to the operating room. Topical anesthesia was given in the form of lidocaine jelly.  The patient was then prepared and draped in the usual sterile fashion.

A Lieberman speculum was then placed on the eye.  The steep axis of astigmatism was then marked, using a corneal marker.  While stabilizing the globe with a 0.12 forceps, a SuperSharp was used to create a paracentesis port at 0230 o'clock relative to surgeon's view from the temporal clear cornea. Viscoelastic was injected into the anterior chamber.  While stabilizing the globe in the same fashion, a 2.85 mm. keratome blade was used to enter the eye superiorly.  A capsulorrhexis forceps was used to create a flap tear in the anterior capsule and a continuous curvilinear capsulorrhexis was performed  This was done without any complication.

Hydrodissection and hydrodelineation were then performed.  Good mobilization of the nucleus was noted.  The nucleus was removed with  phacoemulsification. Cortical material was removed with irrigation-aspiration.  The capsular bag was reformed with viscoelastic.  The wound was enlarged.  An AMO CLRFLX @ diopter intraocular lens was injected into the capsular bag. Viscoelastic was then removed from above and below the lens and the lens was rotated so that the alignment marks matched the steep axis of astigmatism.  Miostat was injected into the anterior chamber. The wound was inspected and noted to be water-tight. The chamber was reformed with BSS and the wound noted to be water-tight.

The lid speculum was removed from the eye.  Maxitrol drops were instilled and a Fox shield was placed over the eye. The patient was sent home with ofloxacin and prednisolone four times a day in the operated eye.

The patient will follow up the next day for postoperative evaluation.


//


PREOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:
Bilateral lower eyelid and punctal ectropion, involutional

POSTOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:
SAME

OPERATION:
1.  Bilateral lower eyelid ectropion repair by lateral tarsal strip procedure
2.  Bilateral lower eyelid medial spindle procedure

ANESTHESIA:  Monitored Anesthesia Care with Local

COMPLICATIONS:  None

INDICATIONS:
Patient has history of bilateral lower eyelid and punctal ectropion causing epiphora and interfering with daily activities.  Risks, benefits, and alternatives were fully discussed, and the patient wished to proceed with surgery.

PROCEDURE:
Following a routine preoperative clearance, patient was brought to the operating room.  Under intravenous sedation and monitoring, local anesthesia consisting of 50/50 mixture of 2% Lidocaine with epinephrine and 0.75% marcaine was injected into both lower eyelids and lateral canthal angle.  Patient was then prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion.

Attention was paid to the right eye.  #15 blade was used to make the lateral canthal skin incision.  Scissors were used to perform lateral canthotomy and inferior cantholysis.  Anterior lamella was dissected off to prepare the lateral tarsal strip.  #15 blade was used to scrape the epithelium, and the lashes and skin were trimmed off the tarsal strip.

The lid was then everted after lacrimal stent was placed through the lower canaliculus to isolate the area.  Marking pen was used to mark the diamond shape conjunctiva to be excised inferior to the punctum.  Monopolar cautery was used to excise the marked conjunctival tissued.  6-0 fast-absorbing was used to approximate the conjunctiva.  5-0 Vicryl sutures were used to suture the tarsal strip onto the internal aspect of the lateral orbital rim.  6-0 Vicryl sutures were used to appose the subcutaneous tissue, and 6-0 running prolene suture was used to appose the overlying skin.  Same procedure was carried out for the left lower eyelid.  Patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications.  Patient was brought to the recovery area in stable condition.



//


PREOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:
Bilateral lower eyelid laxity and Left lower lid entropion, involutional

POSTOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:
SAME

OPERATION:
1.  Bilateral lower eyelid tightening by lateral tarsal strip procedure
2.  Left lower eyelid entropion repair

ANESTHESIA:  Monitored Anesthesia Care with Local

COMPLICATIONS:  None

INDICATIONS:
Patient has history of bilateral lower eyelid laxity and left eyelid involutional entropion causing discomfort from trichiasis causing epiphora and interfering with daily activities.  Risks, benefits, and alternatives were fully discussed, and the patient wished to proceed with surgery.

PROCEDURE:
Following a routine preoperative clearance, patient was brought to the operating room.  Under intravenous sedation and monitoring, local anesthesia consisting of 50/50 mixture of 2% Lidocaine with epinephrine and 0.75% marcaine was injected into both lower eyelids and lateral canthal angle.  Patient was then prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion.

Attention was paid to the left eye.  #15 blade was used to make the lateral canthal skin incision.  Scissors were used to perform lateral canthotomy and inferior cantholysis.  Anterior lamella was dissected off to prepare the lateral tarsal strip.  #15 blade was used to scrape the epithelium, and the lashes and skin were trimmed off the tarsal strip.

The left lower lid was then everted and monopolar cautery was used to incise the conjunctival tissue just inferior to the inferior tarsal border.  Dissection was carried out to expose the lower eyelid retractors.  A strip of overlying orbicularis was excised, and 6-0 Vicryl was used to reattach the lower lid retractors to the tarsal plate.  4-0 Vicryl sutures were used to suture the tarsal strip onto the internal aspect of the lateral orbital rim.  6-0 Vicryl sutures were used to appose the subcutaneous tissue, and 6-0 running prolene suture was used to appose the overlying skin.  The above described lateral tarsal procedure was also carried out for the right lower eyelid.  Maxitrol ointment was applied generously to the surgical wounds.  Patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications.  Patient was brought to recovery area in stable condition.



//


Enucleation

Key points:
• blind painful eye; alcohol injections lead to irreparable ptosis
 “you will never see from this eye again, the eye can not be replaced”
Sutures:
• 4-0 silk, with double armed needle, cut in half, for tagging muscle stumps with silicon implant
• 2 x 6-0 Dermalon, double armed, spatula needle, for securing muscles to medpore implant
• 6-0 Vicryl, P-1 needle, for posterior tenons and anterior tenons closure
• 5-0 Chromic cat gut, for conjunctival closure
Instruments
 16, 18, 20, 22 mm implant: Bioeye (hydroxyapatite), or medpore, or silicon ball (Iowa, universal).  Bioeye from Integrated Orbital Implants, 619-792-3565
• implant sizers
• tonsil scissors, large curved clamp
• small, medium, large conformer
• oculoplastics instruments

1.  General anesthesia (psychologically dificult to be awake during procedure)
2.  Give retrobulbar anesthesia, Marcaine with epinephrine for pain management
3.  Prep eye and surrounding face. Scrub.  Drape with split drape.
4.  Lid speculum
5.  Peritomy with Westcott spring scissors; dissect Tenon’s capsule free from globe
6.  Remove mucles
 • If using Medpore: Identify LR with muscle hook.
  • Tag with double armed 6.0 Dermalon as in strab surgery
  • Cut muscle leaving 1mm stump
  • Tag stump with 4.0 silk to manipulate globe
  • Repeat #4 with MR, IR, SR.  Silk only on two of the recti
  • SO, IO may be left un-tagged
 • If using silicon ball, tag stumps of LR, MR with 4-0 silk, others may be left un-tagged
7.  Dissect Tenon's back as far as possible from globe
8.  Large curved clamp, twing ON while putting traction on 4-0 silk ties, clamp at least 2 - 5 mm posterior to insertion.  Some wait five minutes, not Ellis.  (in retinoblastoma, clamp 10 mm from insertion)
9.  Slide large curved scissors over clamp, cut anterior to clamp.  Clamp may be removed prior to cut if not enough room for both instruments
10. Cautery on fragment. If bleeding not visible, may use compression.  Small amount of bleeding may be tolerated
11. For silicon ball: close posterior Tenon's capsule with purse string 6.0 vicryl
• If using dermal fat implant, harvest now from abdominal fat
12. Size implant with ball sizers.
13. Rinse orbital cavity with bacitracin solution
14. Presoak implant in antibiotic rinse (bacitracin)
15. Separate conjunctiva from Tenon's using blunt Westcott scissors and assistant retracting conjunctival edge while surgeon grasps Tenon’s capsule, cutting between
16. Place implant, if medpore, then use two sheets of plastic cut in thin strips as holders
• For Bioeye, close muscles loosely over the implant, SR to IR, LR to MR.
17. Close Tenon's with 6.0 vicryl interrupted mattress sutures, overlapping about 1-2 mm
18. Close Conj with 5.0 Chromic cat gut running suture
19. Place conformer so that lids close.  If lids remain open, conformer too big
20. Antibiotic subconj optional
21. Ice-soaked telfa pad, fluffs, tape

• F/U one day, one week, one month.  Ocularist in six weeks.


Evisceration
Suture:
• 6-0 Dexon, P-1
• 6-0 Plain Gut, P-1
Instruments:
• Evisceration spoon
• Foot controlled Bovie
• Oculoplastics set

1.  General anesthesia, augmented by retrobulbar injection as with enucleation
2.  Prep, drape, speculum
3.  360° conjunctival peritomy
4.  Remove entire cornea with #11 blade
5.  Evisceration spoon, freer round, to scrape ocular contents from sclera.  Attention to remove all uveal appearing tissue
6.  Cauterize ON and remaining uvea which appears black
7.  Ball implant, only need silicon ball, and size should allow closure of scleral edges
8.  Dexon suture to close scleral edge
9.  Close of overlying conjunctiva with 6.0 chromic gut
10. Place conformer

• F/U one day, one week, one month.  Ocularist in six weeks.


//


LASIK
Updated 5/05

Preoperative points:
Manifest Rx
Cycloplegic Rx
Current Rx
Residual bed after ablation of 300 microns;
Plan 130 micron flap
Exclusionary exam findings (k. sicca, leratoconus, keloid formation, diabetes±, changing refraction, age less than 18, contact lens warpage (SCL out for one week, RGP and soft toric out for 2 weeks, ABMD,
Look for flat and steep corneas as warning signs
Videokeratography
Informed consent
>49: watch for buttonholes; <40D: watch for free flaps
ETC.

Day of Surgery
No makeup, cologne, perfume on patient or observers
Driver to accompany patient home

Preparation for procedure
1.  Examination to assure ocular surface intact, lashes clean etc
2.  Facial prep with betadine. None in the eye. Patient brought into room.
3.  Lay patient on table with head support inflated. Chin up, face centered.
4.  Assure entry of data.
5.  Adjust PD on scope, set 10x mag, chair height. Table previously centered
6.  Expose only the eye to be operated. Cover other eye with clear shield over which is place an occlusive dressing.
7.  Evaluate Microkeratome
• Identify microkeratome under scope
• Blade edge unblemished, smooth movement
• Place pedal in comfortable position
• Look listen and feel.
• Replace MK in holder.
• Check the Suction ring for debris etc.

Procedure
1.  “Ok, we’re going to confirm the data.”
2.  Tech replies with name and refraction
3.  “Look Up.”  Lateral hand pulls lower lid down as assistant applies two drops Alcaine into inferior fornix. Second hand comes in with second. “Blink a few times.”
4.  Cut Op-site applied to upper then lower lashes.
5.  Spring speculum placed. Locking if squeezer.
6.  Bed unlocked as patient is swung under the Laser. (VISX)
7.  Bed locked by asst. (VISX)
8.  Lighting set.
9.  Indicator dye on marker to, cornea opposite hinge and 90 degrees offset each side.
10. Place suction handpiece appropriately on the eye with some posterior pressure. Centered usually, but in case of pannus, may place inferiorly.
11. “Suction ON.”
12. Check IOP with tonometer. Circle should be within control diameter. “Your vision is getting dark now, that’s normal.”
13. Engage MK into guide. Asst places several drops of BSS on corneal surface at edge of MK.
14. Run forward and backward. “Suction OFF.” Give MK to assistant. “Your vision should be coming back now.”
15. Reflect the flap with Slade forceps. If appropriate: “Your flap looks perfect.”
16. Room lights dimmed.
17. Microscope lights intensified at this point. Magnification to 16x.
18. Maloney flap protector used to smooth the stromal bed before ablation if hydration irregularities are noted.
19. Center reticules over center of pupil, “Look at the light.” “Look right at the center of the red light.” “Do you see the light.” “Good”
20. Ventilation tube brought into position by assistant.
21. Laser engaged
22. Recurrent audible support: “Perfect, Good, Excellent, You’re doing great.”
23. Stop as needed to even out hydration of stromal bed
24. Replace flap with irrigating Slade Canula
25. Irrigate under flap to center it, aligning the gutter, checking for debris.
26. 30-40 swipes with strained Murocel sponge to squeegee the interface.
27. 5 minute clock starts with initiation of squeegeeing.
28. Reduce light intensity
29. Patient told to look up at the ceiling until the five minutes done.
30. At end of five minutes, brought back under scope where striae test performed.
31. Rotate bed out, place Ocuflox, Voltaren gtts on eye
32. Remove speculum and drape.
33. Sit up and check vision grossly. “Congratulations”
34. Check at slit lamp
35. Give instructions about eye being closed for the next four hours

Post-op
Ocuflox qid x 4 days
FML qid x 4 days
Voltaren/Acular prn pain
Refresh gtts 2-4x day prn
No hot tub, pools, eye rubbing, sweating profusely


//


Medial Canthoplasty

Key points:
• done with lateral tarsal strip procedure when LTS is not sufficient (puncta would be drawn past mid-pupil)
• perform the medial procedure before the lateral, or the tightening of the medial will be inadequate
• produces small cosmetic defect medially, the caruncle is covered

Sutures:
1 x 5-0 Dexon, P-2 needle, for subcutaneous closure
1 x 6-0 Fast Absorbing plain gut, P-1 needle

Indication: ectropion, entropion, lid laxity with exposure
Pre-op: Assess lid position, determine if lateral surgery adequate.  malar prominence or Polar bear maxilla?
1.  Mild sedation from anesthesiologist
2.  Local anesthesia with 2-3 cc lido + epi + marcaine.  Inject to periosteum
3.  Tell nurses: “Prep  both sides of face;” scrub
4.  #15 blade for medial infraciliary incision.  Extend medially 10 mm and then inferiorly in a European One (un-crossed seven) fashion.  The vertical incision follows natural lines of nose at the site of DCR incision
5.  Expose superior and inferior divisions of MCT
6.  Insert 0-0 Bowman probes into canaliculi; consider replacing with monocanalicular stents if no assistant to hold Bowman probes
7.  Plicate inferior to superior canthal tendon or orbicularis/tarsus to superior tendon with 3-4 burried 5-0 vicryl (Dexon) or 5-0 Nylon suture (polydek ME-2 needle)
8.  Close skin with 6.0 fast absorbing gut
9.  Proceed to lateral tarsal strip
10. Bandage with ice-soaked Tefla pad, fluffs

• follow up day one, one week, one month
• ice packs first two days, then heat
  tobradex drops qid.  Ointments to be used on skin after first few days


//


PREOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:  Bilateral upper eyelid ptosis

POSTOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:  Same

OPERATION:  Bilateral Mullerectomy

ANESTHESIA:  Monitored Anesthesia Care with Local

COMPLICATIONS:  None

INDICATIONS:
Patient has history of bilateral upper eyelid ptosis blocking vision and interfering with daily activities.  Risks, benefits, and alternatives were fully discussed, and the patient wished to proceed with surgery.


PROCEDURE:
Following a routine preoperative clearance, patient was brought to the operating room.  Under intravenous sedation and monitoring, frontal block was administered to both sides using local anesthesia consisting of 50/50 mixture of 2% Lidocaine and 0.75%.  Same anesthetic was injected to both upper lid margins.  Patient was then prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion.  6-0 silk suture was used to create a traction suture along the upper eyelid margin.
Same procedure was performed for both upper eyelids.  Demarre retractor was used to evert the eyelid.  Calipers were used to mark medial, middle, and lateral sites 4mm above the upper tarsal border.  6-0 silk suture was passed through the conjunctiva along the marked sites, and lifted and clamped with a Putterman clamp to isolate the conjunctiva-muller muscle complex.  6-0 prolene suture was passed full thickness from skin through conjunctiva, and a running horizontal mattress suture was placed under the Putterman clamp.  Suture was then externalized full thickness through to the eyelid skin.  #15 blade was used to excise the isolated conjunctiva-muller muscle complex.  Externalized 6-0 prolene suture was tied down.  Same procedure was carried out for both upper eyelids.  6-0 silk retraction suture was removed.  Maxitrol ointment was applied to both eyes.

Patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications.  Patient was brought to the recovery area in stable condition.



//


Penetrating Keratoplasty

Key points:
• Correct eye
• Order donor cornea prior to surgery
Suture:
• 10-0 Nylon on TG-140 or TG-160 cutting needle
• 4-0 Silk, double armed
• 7-0 Silk, double armed
Instruments:
• Flieringa Fixation rings, multiple sizes
• Barraquer Closed wire speculum
• Castroviejo Calipers
• Patton double end lens spatula with spoon
• Grasping Alligator forceps
• Polack double cornea forceps
• Base plate and piston carrier
• Trephinators, multiple sizes
• Or Hessburg Baron Vacuum trephinator, 7.5, 8.0 mm
• Trout-Katz Transplant scissors, left & right
• Cataract set for other instruments

1.  Make sure cornea is in OR
2.  Pre-op prep with Pilo 2%, Neosporin all given 3 times
• Retrobulbar anesthesia. 3-5 cc 2% Lidocaine, 0.75% Marcaine, 150 units Wydase.  25 G 1 1/2" needle (or Atkinson needle)
• GA for first cases, combined cases, complicated eyes
3.  Set up microscope, chair, wrist rests.
4.  Prep eye with Povidone-Iodide 5% (2 ggts betadine in 10cc); scrub during prep
5.  Drape, closed end Barraquer speculum
6.  Consider 1 ampule of mannitol (12.5 gram, but can give up to 50 gram)
7.  Sew Flieringa Ring, slightly larger than limbus.  4-0 silk, six scleral bites, running
8.  Secure two 4-0 silk traction sutures to ring, double wrap at 12:00, 6:00.  Clamp with mosquito clamp then steri strip to drap
9.  Assess center of pupil, size corneal button to excise with calipers.  Announce two trephination sizes to open, the measured size and a larger trephinator
10. Light shield on patient’s cornea
11. Obtain donor corneal button. Rim for culture. Cover button with optisol
12. Trephinate patient’s cornea, first lightly placing the trephinator on cornea to assure centration.  Slight twisting motion until 90% through.  Then puncture with microsharp
13. Trout-Katz scissors right then left. Place cornea under optisol until donor sutured.
14. Viscoelastic onto AC
15. Secure donor cornea.
• Four cardinal sutures, cut long for speed
• Place the next four tied individually.  Then next eight placed individually, but tied after each four have been passed.
16. Fluorescein test the cornea (optional if AC formed and wound looks good)
17. Consider Diamox post op and intraop if viscoelastic to be left in place
18. Post-op ancef and dexamethasone sub conjunctivally
19. Presssure patch eye

• Post op management with antibiotic for four weeks
• Post op Pred Forte qid 1 mo, bd 1 mo, QD 1 mo, QOD 3 mos
• Shield at night for first 8 weeks
• Pressure patch for epithelial defect for first few days
• Sutures not to be removed until 6 weeks, then one at a time


//


COMBINED TRAB/CE/IOL


Supplies

1.  Retrobulbar anesthesia
2.  Cataract prep and drape
3.  Wire or PKP speculum
4.  Corneal 7-0 Vicryl traction suture placed inferiorly to allow view of AC
5.  Superotemporal peritomy b/t SR and LR with radial relaxing incisions at edges.  Watch out for superior rectus muscle
6.  Cautery hemostasis
7.  Scleral flap; 69 beaver blade, fine forceps
8.  Antimetabolite
9.  Antimetabolite irrigation
10. Limbal paracentesis
11. Viscoelastic injection
12. AC entry; 3.0 or 3.2 keratome
13. Capsulotomy and hydrodissection
14. Phacoemulsification
15. IOL insertion
16. Viscoelastic removal
17. Miochol injection
18. Sclerectomy
19. Peripheral iridectomy
20. Secure scleral flap
21. Closure of conjunctival flap
22. Reinflate bleb
23. Siedel test
24. Subconjunctival injection
25. Antibiotic ointment
26. Patch, shield


//


Pneumatic Retinopexy - Packo Method

Pre-op/Consent: warn patient that if this fails and pt needs vtx, there is a high chance that the lens will have to come out during vtx surgery.  high incidence of intraop cataract formation after gas is removed.

1.  Proparacaine

2.  Lidocaine 4% pledget with cotton swab from eye pad.  Place under upper eyelid with aid of 1 q-tip

3.  Lidocaine 2% subconjunctival.  Roll bleb towards limbus with eyelid.

4.  Betadine 5% drops x2

5.  Set up Cryo machine.  PSI should be > 600 to freeze quickly.  Place plastic cryo probe sleeve on tip.  Test probe by pressing on pedal.  Temp should go to - 80 fast, should see freezing from tip.

6.  Cryo break without lid speculum.  Do not come in and out of fornix as this will increase fluid throughput through tear and also release more RPE into SRF.

7.  Few more Proparacine gtts.

8.  Set up Gas. Use C2F6 (perfluoro-ethane) b/c expands quicker and disappears faster than C3F8.  Still expands 4x.  Connect 10cc syringe to 0.22 millipore filter. The max PSI for the filter is 75 PSI, so do not open gas valve from tank to fast or will destroy filter.  Connect 10cc syinge - millipore complex to a 3 way stop cock.  Directly accross, connect the tubing to the C2F6 gas tank. Open the tank and slowly let gas fill the 10cc syringe.  Close stop cock and remove gas and lavage x 1.  Then, reconnect 10cc syringe-filter to stop cock and fill again with 10cc gas.  Connect a 1cc Tb syringe to 3rd (perpendicular) opening on stop cock and transfer filtered gas in 10cc syringe to 1cc Tb syringe.  Fill to 1cc. Turn off stop cock to 10cc in case you need more.  Remove Tb syringe and place a 30g needle on it.  Remove gas until only 0.35 cc remain in Tb syringe.

 9.  Lid speculum.

10.  Raise bed to good height for your back.

11.  Lie patient on side of eye that is not being operated (i.e. if treating L eye, place pt on right side).

12.  Ask patient to open the non-operated eye and fixate on your neck tie.

13.  Put on indirect and have 20 D lens ready.

14.  Enter at 4mm posterior to limbus temporally.  All patients are injected temporally b/c that is the best lid exposure.  Penetrate deep into vitreous to penetrate anterior hyaloid space. Visualize this with indirect and 20D.

15.  Pull needle back until it is just out of view from the red reflex (without the 20 D lens).

16.  Slowly in inject the gas.

17.  Remove the tip and roll/depress quickly with q-tip.

18.  Slowly roll the patient on her back.

19.  Check to see if CRA perfused.  If not, then wait 10 min.  If still not perfused, then perform paracentesis.  OTHERS AUTOMATICALLY DO PARACENTESIS AS GAS WILL EXPAND…

20.  Eye patch.

21.  Give pt. atropine, maxitrol and pain meds post op. Or just givem them Oflofxcin and a cycloplegic if you want them dilated for the exam the next day.


//


PREOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:  1.  Pterygium RIGHT  eye

POSTOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:  1.  Pterygium RIGHT  eye

OPERATION:  1.  Excision of pterygium, RIGHT  eye
                          2.  Conjunctival autograft, RIGHT  eye

ANESTHESIA:  Monitored

COMPLICATIONS:  None

INDICATIONS:
Patient has history of bothersome pterygium in the RIGHT  eye.  Risks, benefits, and alternatives were fully discussed, and the patient wished to proceed with surgery.


PROCEDURE:
Following a routine preoperative clearance, patient was brought to the operating room.  The RIGHT eye was identified and marked to be the correct surgical eye.  Under intravenous sedation, local anesthesia consisting of 50/50 mixture of 2% lidocaine and 0.75% marcaine was injected into the inferior peribulbar space.  Tetracaine was placed onto the eye.  Patient was prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion.

Lid speculum was placed in the RIGHT eye.  Corneal protector was placed.  Marking pen was used to mark the edge of the medial pterygium.  2% lidocaine with epinephrine was injected to lift the pterygium.  Westcott scissors were used to cut and undermine the pterygium.  Hemostat was used to clamp the edge of the pterygium and held up to dissect the head of the pterygium off the cornea.  Eraser cautery was used to achieve hemostasis.  9-0 vicryl was used to approximate the conjunctival edges.  Remaining defect next to the corneal limbus was measured, and corresponding area was marked on the superior bulbar conjunctiva.  2% lidocaine with epinephrine was injected to lift the superior bulbar conjunctiva, and the marked conjunctiva was harvested using westcott scissors.  Conjunctival autograft was placed along the limbus, and approximated using 9-0 vicryl sutures.  Maxitrol ointment was placed and a patch and shield were placed over the eye.

Patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications.  Patient was brought to the recovery area in stable condition.


//


PREOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:  1.  Bilateral upper eyelid dermatochalasis;
2.  Bilateral upper eyelid ptosis

POSTOPERATIVE DIAGNOSIS:  SAME

OPERATION:  1.  Bilateral upper eyelid blepharoplasty;  2.  Bilateral upper eyelid ptosis repair

ANESTHESIA:  Monitored Anesthesia Care with Local

COMPLICATIONS:  None

INDICATIONS:
Patient has history of bilateral upper eyelid dermatochalasis and ptosis blocking vision and interfering with daily activities.  Risks, benefits, and alternatives were fully discussed, and the patient wished to proceed with surgery.


PROCEDURE:
Following a routine preoperative clearance, patient was brought to the operating room.  The upper eyelid creases were marked.  Pinch technique was used to mark the excess upper eyelid skin.  Under intravenous sedation and monitoring, local anesthesia consisting of 50/50 mixture of 2% Lidocaine with epinephrine and 0.75% marcaine was injected into both upper eyelids.  Patient was then prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion.  #15 blade was used to make the skin incision.  Monopolar cautery was used to excise the skin muscle flap.  Careful cautery hemostasis was achieved.  Orbital septum was entered to expose the preaponeurotic fat pads.  Excess fat pad was removed and shrunken back using monopolar cautery.  Levator was identified and advanced onto the tarsal plate using 6-0 prolene sutures.  Careful hemostasis was achieved.  Skin edges were apposed using 6-0 prolene suture in a running fashion.  Antibiotic ointment was applied to the surgical sites.  Same procedure was performed for both upper eyelids, and the eyelid margin was checked for evenness and symmetry.

Patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications.  Patient was brought to the recovery area in stable condition.


//


Strabismus

Accurate preop evaluation
NPO
Evaluate on day of surgery to verify plan
Suture: 6.0 Biosorb C, Double armed, 12" , 1-2 needle
1. Prep in usual fashion
2. Drape with both eyes available
3. Lid speculum
4. Forced ductions, then take locking forceps and create exposure
5. Conjunctival incision
  Fornix approach: midway between insertion of IR and MR/LR
  Cut straight down with Westcott scissors
  Expose bare sclera

  Limbal approach: peritomy with careful dissection to sclera.
  May use locking Cassies to gain exposure
6. Stevens hook, Jameson Hook, Green muscle hook (flat tip),
7. Sweep the anterior horn, and expose muscular sheath
8. Cut muscular sheath anteriorly, superiorly then inferiorly

Recession:
9. Pass suture in usual fashion, and tie
10. Cut first half of muscle, place locking forceps at insertion, then cut second half and place locking forceps at other insertion
11. Take two locking forceps, have assistant mark distance
12. Pass suture with episcleral bites, leaving 2 mm gap.  Tie, cut
13. Consider closing conjunctiva with vicryl

Resection:
9. Display muscle between two Jameson or Green muscle hooks
10. Measure with calipers, from hook to hook
11. Pass suture.
12. Cut distal to suture, then cut insertion. Disregard muscle remnant
13. Pass suture through old insertion stump and tie.
14. Close.


//


Surgical Procedure DSEK
Andrew L. Sorenson, MD
May 2006

Order in advance a Corneal Button with 300 µ Anterior Lamellar Button (per Mark Terry, uses 300 on all donors). San Diego Eye Bank

Instruments:
Portable Slit Lamp
Tonopen
Fluorescein strip
Corneal Tray
Endothelial Scraper
Charlie Forceps
Vacuum Trephinator for punch of donor cornea Barron Hessburg, 8.0 mm or 8.5 mm

Steps:
1.  Bring patient into room, no special marking needed.
2.  Retrobulbar block with Vitrase on 25G needle
3.  Drape, Von Loenen Lid Speculum, sticky instrument wipe

At the second Table:
4.  Remove corneal button (with pre-cut lamellar flap) and grab with .5 forceps.
5.  Weck sponge to remove extra optisol
6.  Remove cornea flap.
7.  Mark center of stroma with “S”
8.  Place cornea into the Barron Vacuum Donor Trephine system. Center.
9.  Engage suction system. Should be able to visualize the edge of the stromal cut.
10. Trephinate the 8.0 endothelial button. Larger buttons end up with thicker rims and synechiae development (Schanzlin)
11. Leave in place for now

Main table
12. Create paracentesis ports at 1:30 and 10:30.
13. Create a peritomy superiorly, cauterize as needed.
14. Create 3.5 mm keratome entry into AC, beveled.
a.  The entry angle needs to be angled more steeply than with phaco.
15. Fill AC with Healon or use AC chamber maintainer
16. Mark the Anterior corneal surface with 8.0 or 9.0 mm ring to identify the amount of endothelium to be stripped. Use Ink to the marker to identify the location of the disk placement.
17. Mark the site for exit of the 10-0 prolene within the 8.0 mm circle. This site receives the first STROMAL SIDE suture pass.
18. Trypan Blue to the AC
19. Using a reverse sinskey hook, strip the appropriate amount of endothelium. The paracentesis ports at 10 and 2 are for this purpose.
20. Remove endothelial specimen and display on corneal surface to assure completion.
21. Score the peripheral stroma with reverse cystitome to create the Velcro effect as seen with DLEK.
22. Create paracentral corneal incision, 3 mm from center superiorly, for later use of microsharp for moving disc
23. REMOVE ALL VISCOLELASTIC!

24. BUTTON PLACEMENT
25. Bring Donor button into field with Corneal Spatula and .5 forceps
26. Rest on corneal surface.
27. Richeimer method
a.  Pass first Suture through the eye and exit in the peripheral cornea.
b.  Rest Endothelial button on Sorenson Spatula.
c.  Pass second end of double armed 10-0 prolene through the button entering from the endothelial side (up side)
d.  Pass second needle through eye and out the cornea at 6:00 Central to the 8.0 mm zone. This is the Stroma to Stroma suture.
e.  Angle the folded cornea to the LEFT so that when it enters the eye, it unfolds with the stromal surface anteriorly. (to the left because this is the direction of the trailing suture end).
f.  Fold the button using the Charlie forceps.
g.  Place button within the wound but do not enter. TO THE LEFT!
h.  Pull the tissue with the prolene suture into the AC
i.  Once in the eye, the button should unfold. Insert air into the AC within the folded button. As it unfolds, look for the “S” if present.
j.  Cut the Prolene suture and remove from eye.
k.  Suture the wound with running 10-0 Nylon suture
28. Center the button on top of the air. Use anterior corneal incisions and microsharp instrument to move the button in the AC. Steam roll or push the cornea to evacuate the fluid from the interface.
29. Fill the eye with 100% air fill and leave for 10 minutes
30. Evacuate the air and refill to 80% fill.
31. Close peritomy
32. Sub conj Kenalog/Ancef
33. Remove speculum, drapes
34. Patient Supine for 30 minutes then slit lamp exam, IOP and place patch.

Followup:
Pred forte, Vigamox qid one week, PF qid first ??three months?
Timolol until air gone


//


Temporal (Topical) Clear Cornea Phaco + IOL

Key points:
• Correct eye
• Correct IOL.  Double check and place IOL calculations next to lens selection to verify
Suture:
• optional 10-0 Nylon on TG-140: no suture if wound constructed well and self-sealing

1.  Pre-op prep with flurbiprofen 0.03%, Tropicamide 1%, Phenylephrine 2.5%, Neosporin all given 3 times
2.  Anesthesia.  Gloves, alcohol, drop of tetracaine on cornea
• 3-5 cc 2% Lidocaine, 0.75% Marcaine, 150 units Wydase.  25 G 1 1/2" needle (or Atkinson needle)
• or 2% lidocaine only
• or topical anesthesia: 0.75% Marcaine, 2 drops preoperatively q 5 min, 0.5 cc non-preserved 2% lidocaine intracamerally after paracentesis
3.  Set up microscope, chair, wrist rests. In obese people, consider reverse Trendelenberg to decrease positive pressure.  Microscope pedels left foot.  Phaco Right foot.
4.  Prep eye with Povidone-Iodide 5% (2 ggts betadine in 10cc); scrub during prep
5.  Drape with occlusive drape, stick end of cotton tip applicator (dry lids well to grab lashes with adhesive). Single cut in mid-portion of drape with relaxing mid-upper cut.
6.  Open loop wire speculum
7.  Paracentesis: 15° microsharp, 50-90° to left of main incision (left handed surgeons make paracentesis to right)
8.  Viscoelastic to AC: fill through paracentesis port in cross-lens technique to evacuate aqueous
9.  Enter AC with 2.8 mm keratome blade.  Avoid stripping Descemet’s by elevating heel of blade, but don’t violate anterior capsule (gentle wobble of blade helps with resistance from cotton tip swab or Thornton Fixation Ring)
10. Capsulotomy: cystitome needle, loaded on Vicoelastic. +/- Eutradas.  Refill AC as needed to prevent radialization of capsular tear
11. Hydrodissect: 27G or bigger, first J then straight canula
12. Sculpt lens: 70% power, 20 cc flow rate, 50 mmHg vacuum
• divide and conquer most reliable, but consider cracking as you go; use cyclodialysis spatula as second instrument (others = ball tip, chopper, Y-shaped tip)
13. Quadrant removal: 70% power, 20 cc flow, 150 mmHg vacuum
• keep spatula posterior to quadrant to protect posterior capsule
14. I/A: never take pedel off position 1.  Reach under capsular edge before aspirating.  Ask for IOL
15. Viscoelastic: fill AC, especially bag
16. Widen wound with premeasured blade, or freehand to appropriate size (2-8 to 3.5 mm)
17. Fold/load IOL
18. Place IOL: long axis of forceps parallel with long axis of haptics. Haptic close to capsule, dial into bag with Lester Pusher, Sinskey Hook, or place trailing haptic with KM forceps by pronating hand
19. Remove viscoelastic with IA for about 20 sec.  Push IOL back to release all
20. Reform AC with BSS, note disappearance of posterior capsule haptic-induced folds with appropriate fill
21. +/- Miotics : Needed if can-opener style or large rhexis
22. Check wound closure with Weck cell sponge
23. Antibiotics: 100 mg Ancef, 2 mg dexamethasone, +/- Vanco, place deeply away from vessels to avoid bleeding.  Note: these can be given at start of case
24. +/- Patch, ointment.  If topical, demonstrate vision and start drops now.

• If trabeculectomy exists, then inject 5mg 5-FU 180° from bleb repeated x 3 days
• post-op neosporin or Cipro or Polytrim + Pred Forte
• shield at night for three weeks, glasses during day
• endophthalmitis warning


//


Temporal Artery Biopsy


Instruments
Sterile drape
Marking Pen
2% Lidocaine, without Epi
27G 1 1/4” needle
Betadine Prep
Stevens or similar scissors
Kelly clamp
Forceps
Hand held cautery
Formalin

Suture & Sharps
6-0 Vicryl suture on P-1
3 x 4-0 Silk Ties
#15 Bard Parker Blade
Razor

Procedure
1.  Palpate
2.  Shave the hair
3.  Mark with dots
4.  Lidocaine without epinephrine. Inject on both sides of vessel.  Save sterile needle
5.  Cut down with #15 blade to superficial temporalis fascia.  Do not cut through muscle
6.  While tenting up, after blunt dissection, squirt lidocaine to stop muscle spasm
7.  Dissect, cut down to vessel
8.  Double tie the vessel proximally with 4-0 Silk Ties
9.  Free up vessel distally for 2 cm
10. Tie distal end with silk
11. Excise specimen
12. Cautery hemostasis
 Close with interrupted 6-0 Dexon etc


//


Transcutaneous Ptosis Repair

• Measurements in office (ptosis excursion, lag, dominant eye, photos)
• phenylephrine to ptotic eye; digital lift of ptotic eye with eval. of other eye
• Consent, NPO, OR sched, photos, No ASA, Prepare frozen peas
• Dominant eye first
• consider transconjunctival muellerectomy in cases where neosenephrine test is adequate correction

Suture:
• 1 x 6-0 Dexon, P-1 needle (or 7-0 Neurolon or 7-0 Silk)
• 1 x 6-0 Fast Absorbing Plain Gut, P-1

1.  Markings, pupillary center and lid; Check redundancy with 12 mm Green Forceps
2.  Numbing medicine: 5 cc 2% Lidocaine with 1:100,000 Epi + .25% Marcaine. Wydase optional.  Note amt of injection, give same volume each side.
3.  “Prep both eyes and face to chin.”  Drape with both eyes exposed.  Gauze over mouth.  Scrub
4.  Incise skin and resect wedge: // 15 blade, .2 Cassies, counter traction from asst.  +/- orbic OK
5.  Cauterize: Foot-controlled Bovie
6.  Incise through orbicularis using vertical traction
7.  Pressure on globe to express orbital fat and identify septum.
8.  Tent up septum. Incise horizontally with blunt spring Westcotts; extend to margins of tarsus
9.  Dissect thru to tarsus centrally, directing Stevens scissors 2mm below superior tarsal margin.  Follow plane laterally & medially stopping before the horns.  Clean up superior margin of pretarsal orbicularis which was cut during incision
10. Reattach aponeuosis to tarsus.  Place adjustable 6-0 Dexon horizontal mattress suture centrally connecting levator and tarsus.  Tetracaine to cornea.  Flip lid, check conjunctiva for perforation
11. Complete adjustable knot, light out, follow clean stick, watch brow action.  Do not worry about occlusion --> orbic is blocked.  Goal is upper lid at limbus in dominant lid, 1mm higher in fellow lid.  Complete three sutures, checking after each one.
• Sequence: flip lid, pass suture, adjustable knot, lights out, clean stick, check position by having patient look at stick.  If contour OK, tie knot.  Consider leaving lid at limbus in dominant eye.
12. Suture superior margin of cut pretarsal orbicularis to inferior margin of levator aponeurosis to prevent lash inversion. 6-0 Dexon
13. Do not close septum
14. Create lid crease by passing suture from tarsus at the appropriate height to the overlying skin/muscle complex.  This can also be achieved with sutures from step #12 by making suture passes more superficial.
15. Close skin with running and interrupted 6.0 fast absorbing gut

• Ice-soaked Telfa pad, bandage for four hours.  Repeat ice hourly for 15 minutes first day
• T'dex ung to wound starting second day,
• F/U one day, one week, one month.

• post-operative adjustment at one week if needed
