// https://github.com/dustypomerleau/eye-notes

ptosis

  major categories of ptosis
    myogenic
    aponeurotic
    neurogenic
    mechanical
    traumatic

  short ptosis DDx
    myogenic
      simple congenital ptosis
      MED
      blepharophimosis syndrome
      CFEOM
      mitochondrial myopathies
        CPEO
          including Kearns-Sayre
        MELAS
      AD muscular dystrophies
        OPD
        FSHD
        myotonic dystrophy
          hatchet-like facies
    aponeurotic
      involutional aponeurotic ptosis
      congenital defect in the aponeurosis
    neurogenic
      CN3P
      Horner syndrome
      Marcus-Gunn jaw winking syndrome
      MG
      apraxia of eyelid opening
      blepharospasm
    mechanical
      COMMON:
        capillary hemangioma
        plexiform neurofibroma
    traumatic
    pseudoptosis
      hypotropia
      fellow eye
        lid retraction
        proptosis


//


  ptosis DDx:

    BROADLY: any cause of CN3P
    BROADLY: any cause of Horner syndrome
    BROADLY: any cause of pseudoptosis
      orbital mass
      lid edema
      fellow eye UL retraction
      fellow eye buphthalmos

    infectious
      BROADLY: CN3P due to meningitis
        viral
        bacterial
        fungal
      viral
        VZV

    inflammatory
      inflammatory
        NSOI
        sarcoid
          & sarcoid CN3P
        BROADLY:
          any lacrimal gland
            inflammation
            infiltration
            mass
      autoimmune
        MG
          childhood onset is possible
          ask about
            difficulty
              swallowing
              speaking
              breathing
            proximal muscle weakness
            fatigability
              ptosis worsens in sustained upgaze
              worse late in the day
          Cogan lid twitch
            upward flick of ptotic lid
            when returning to primary from 15+ seconds of downgaze
          weak OOM
            unable to resist forced eyelid opening
          clinical tests
            Tensilon (edrophonium) test
              dose
                adults
                  take your baseline measurements for comparison
                  have atropine ready and monitor vitals
                    bradycardia
                    hypotension
                    bronchospasm
                    abdominal pain
                  start with 10 mg total
                    2 mg IV
                      wait 2 minutes
                    4 mg IV
                      wait 1 minute
                    4 mg IV
                  stop at any point if you get a response
                kids
                  0.1 mg/kg total
                  divide 2/10, 4/10, 4/10 as with adults
                infants
                  1 mg SC
                    don't bother with a ladder
            sleep test
              30 minutes in a dark room
              expect 2+ mm improvement in ptosis immediately after waking
                easiest reference is fissure height before and after
            ice test
              ice pack over closed eyes x 2-5 minutes
                ptosis may improve in 2 minutes but motility takes 5 minutes
                  for ptosis only stop at 2 minutes
                  3+ minutes is uncomfortable and doesn't improve the test
              expect 2+ mm improvement in ptosis immediately after removing ice
              sleep + ice for the last 2 minutes can be combined
                usually produces a larger response
                easier to measure a positive
          AChR-Ab
            helpful if positive
            positive less than 1/2 the time
          chest CT
            rule out thymoma
            present in 5-%
          EMG
            only if diagnosis is not clear
          treatment
            anticholinesterase drugs
              Mestinon (pyridostigmine)
              Prostigmin (neostigmine)
            SSIMT
              prednisolone
              azathioprine
              cyclophosphamide
              cyclosporine
            plasmapheresis
            IVIG
            thymectomy
        demyelinating disease
          CN3P
          Horner syndrome
      vasculitis
        BROADLY: any vasculitis-related CN3P
      allergic
        atopy
        allergy
        often mechanical
          eye rubbing

    idiopathic

    iatrogenic
      iatrogenic
        BOTOX
      surgical
        post-surgical ptosis

    vascular
      vasoocclusive
        ischemic CN3P
        Horner due to medullary CVA
      aneurysm
        PCA aneurysm CN3P
      hemorrhagic
        hemorrhagic compressive CN3P
      hypercoagulable
        cavernous sinus thrombosis CN3+ palsy

    neoplastic
      solid
        BROADLY: any compressive tumor CN3P
        Horner due to a solid tumor
          medullary tumor
          apical lung tumor
          neck mass
        BROADLY: any solid tumor mechanical ptosis
          plexiform neurofibroma
      vascular
        capillary hemangioma mechanical ptosis
      lymphoproliferative
        lymphoma infiltrative CN3P
      metastatic
        BROADLY: any metastatic carcinoma CN3P or Horner
          infiltrative
          compressive

    DAMS
      medications
        medication-induced myopathy
          e.g. HAART

    degenerative
      degeneration
        aponeurotic ptosis

    congenital
      congenital
        congenital myogenic ptosis
        congenital CN3P
        Marcus Gunn jaw winking
          CN5 where CN3 should be
          not a true CN3P
          primary issue is with CN5 innervation of the levator
          more than half have strabismus
            COMMON: MED
              look for a hypotropia
          treatment
            observe
            strabismus surgery before lids if needed
            COMMON:
              *bilateral* levator transection
                remove a 10 mm section
                  above the Whitnall ligament
                  transconjunctival approach
                    described by Bowyer in 2004
                    when isolating the levator
                      avoid the SR!
                  anterior approach via lid crease incision is also possible
              + *bilateral* frontalis sling
                Bowyer technique
                  Crawford triangles
                  autogenous fascia lata
                  silicone is also an option
                    my preference
                  lid height should just clear the visual axis
            ALSO:
              levator advancement
                useful when
                  ptosis is the primary problem
                  winking is very mild
        congenital MED
          restrictive
          innervational
          mixed
        microphthalmos
        congenital Horner syndrome
          usually brachial plexus trauma

    genetic
      inherited
        AD blepharophimosis syndrome
          ptosis
          epicanthus inversus
          horizontal eyelid shortening
          nasal bridge hypoplasia
        AD OPD
        AD FSHD
          face
            hard to whistle or drink from a straw
          upper arms and shoulders
            scapulae stick out
              AKA scapular winging
          eventually effects lower body also
        AD myotonic dystrophy
        CFEOM
          AD OR AR
          restrictive strabismus ± ptosis
          *very* hard to treat surgically
        mitochondrial CPEO
          usually ptosis precedes strabismus
          ± Kearns-Sayre
            CPEO
            cardiac conduction defects
              ALWAYS: ECG
            pigmentary retinopathy
            chorioretinal atrophy
            ataxia
            deafness
            DM
            dementia
          RRF on muscle biopsy
            abnormal mitochondria accumulate in the muscle
            many mitochondrial myopathies will have this
        mitochondrial MELAS
          Mitochondrial myopathy
          Encephalopathy
            seizures
            headaches
          Lactic Acidosis
            abdominal pain
            vomiting
            trouble breathing
          Stroke-like episodes
            transient paresis

    trauma
      eye rubbing
        including allergies
      CTL

    neurologic
      Horner syndrome
        dedicated DDx, but the main concerns
          1st or 2nd order neuron Horner syndrome
            medullary tumor OR infarct
              Wallenberg syndrome AKA lateral medullary syndrome
                Horner
                loss of pain and temperature sensation
                  contralateral body
                  ipsilateral face
                dysphagia
                ataxia
                  damage to spinocerebellar tracts
                    loss of proprioceptive input to the cerebellum
            apical lung tumor
              Pancoast tumor
              metastatic neuroblastoma
            C spine trauma
          3rd order neuron Horner syndrome
            carotid dissection
              spontaneous
              trauma
                chiropractic manipulation
              high risk of hemispheric stroke
                usually from thromboemboli
            cavernous sinus aneurysm
      CN3P covered above
      RARELY:
        apraxia of eyelid opening
        blepharospasm


//


ptosis exam
  cyclorefraction
    particularly important in children
    induced astigmatism can cause amblyopia
      even if the visual axis is clear
  pupils // Savino rule see pupils.txt
    CN3P
    Horner
      sympathetic anatomy
        1st order
          hypothalamus => C8-T2 CSCB
        2nd order
          C8-T2 CSCB => sympathetic chain in the neck => SCG
        3rd order
          SCG => ICA plexus => long ciliary Ns
            cavernous sinus
            orbit
      Horner testing
        ALWAYS: drop both eyes
          you are making a comparison of responses
          post-drop measurements should be taken in a well-lit room
        cocaine 4%
          prevents NE reuptake
          will fail to dilate any Horner patient
            they aren't producing NE
          positive test if post-drop anisocoria is 0.8+ mm
        apraclonidine 1%
          will only dilate a hypersensitive Horner pupil
            mostly alpha2
            alpha1 effect is not enough to dilate a normal pupil
            so the anisocoria will flip in a patient with Horner
              this is easier to detect than the cocaine endpoint
            NEVER: use apraclonidine in < 1 y baby
              causes CNS depression in infants
        phenylephrine 1% (dilute)
          will only dilate a hypersensitive Horner pupil
          same endpoint as apraclonidine
            anisocoria will flip in a patient with Horner
        hydroxyamphetamine 1%
          induces NE release
            will fail to dilate a 3rd-order Horner
          endpoint
            anisocoria gets bigger in a 3rd-order Horner
        so for Horner diagnosis
          cocaine will not dilate a Horner pupil
            not commonly used but ALWAYS mention it on exams
          apraclonidine OR (dilute) phenylephrine
            will only dilate a Horner pupil
            flips the anisocoria if positive
        and for Horner localization
          hydroxyamphetamine will only dilate if the 3rd-order neuron is intact
            i.e. Horner is 1st or 2nd order
        all the agents except cocaine are 1%
        in practice
          if there is acute onset of Horner with neck pain
            you don't have time to do this pharmacologic testing before imaging
            ALWAYS: MRI + MRA to exclude carotid dissection first
              brain
                medullary tumor OR infarct
                  Wallenberg syndrome AKA lateral medullary syndrome
              C + T spine
              neck
                carotid dissection
                  look for high-intensity T1 crescent in the carotid
                    easiest to see in axial views
              apical chest
                Pancoast tumor
                metastatic neuroblastoma
            most institutions have a Horner protocol for imaging these areas
              RVEEH uses CT + CTA instead of MRI + MRA
            if there is a dissection
              ADMIT to neurology
                they will dictate anticoagulation versus antiplatelet therapy
                  still controversial which you choose
                some carotid dissections are amenable to intervention
                  endovascular techniques
                  surgery
  EOM // Savino rule see strabismus.txt
    CN3P
  MRD1 UL
    lift the fellow UL
    re-measure
    Hering may cause you to underestimate ptosis
  MRD2 LL
  fissure height in 1˚
    widest point
    distance fixation
    should be MRD1 + MRD2
    good way to check your numbers
  lid crease position
    mm from lid margin
  levator function
    downgaze to upgaze
    don't let them use the frontalis
      put pressure on the brow if you need to
    4- mm needs a sling
    8+ mm is perfect for levator advancement
    in between is a gray zone
      careful with big levator advancements
      can lift the lid off the cornea and cause OSD
  Muller function
    phenylephrine test
      1.5+ mm is positive
    usually negative for involutional aponeurotic ptosis
    most helpful for surgical planning in 2- mm small ptosis
  lid lag in downgaze?
    common in congenital ptosis
  Bell reflex
  sustained upgaze
    MG
  synkinesis
    lid elevates with jaw movement
      Margus Gunn jaw winking
    lid elevates in downgaze
      aberrant regeneration after CN3P
  OSD
    exposure
  corneal sensation
  iris
    congenital Horner
      iris is lighter


//


surgical treatment
  Mullerectomy + conjunctival resection
    2- mm with a positive phenylephrine test
    avoid epi in the local infiltration to keep measurements accurate
  Fasanella-Servat
    2- mm with a positive OR negative phenylephrine test
    not quite as predictable as Mullerectomy
    mainly tarsectomy + small mullerectomy
      so still effective even with a negative phenylephrine test
      if they do have a positive phenylephrine test
        do a Mullerectomy
  levator advancement
    can correct 2- mm but is best for 3-4 mm
      patients with 4+ mm ptosis often have poor levator function
        in that case you need a sling anyway
    allows you to adjust the height on the table
      much more predictable under local anesthesia
    allows concurrent blepharoplasty
      aponeurotic ptosis repair (anterior approach):
        mark the skin to show the lid apex and a mini-blepharoplasty
        local anesthetic infiltration front and back
        excise the mini-bleph
        clear OOM off the tarsus
        ask patient to look up
          identify the tugging of the levator
        open through the septum
          levator is right underneath
        identify the orbital fat pad superiorly
          undermine a bit so you are just holding levator
        double-armed 5-0 ethibond suture
          passed horizontally through the tarsus
          just above the lid apex you marked
        evert the lid
          ensure you didn't pass full-thickness
        2nd suture further laterally
        pull the levator aponeurosis down
          pass the 2 double-armed sutures through the middle to upper part of the aponeurosis
        tie a couple throws over a loop
          check the lid position to make sure you're happy before locking
        goal is to have the lid margin in line with the superior limbus
          lid will sit a touch higher than the actual postoperative result
            2˚ epinephrine in the anesthetic
        trim off excess levator in front of the sutures
        close the OOM
          capture a small bite of the levator to re-form the lid crease
        close the skin
          running 6-0 prolene
          plan removal about a week after surgery
  frontalis suspension sling
    autogenous fascia lata
      patient 3+ YO for harvesting
      strong
      integrates well
      rejection is rare
    banked fascia lata
      patient 3- YO
      rejection risk is mostly theoretical
    silicone
      Silastic rod
      no harvesting
      easy to adjust
      classic pentagon pattern
        mark skin
          3 sites along lid margin
            some docs e.g. RC incise across the full lid
              this allows direct suturing of the tubing to the tarsus
              // see alternative by RC here
              //   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vXsmprEMkbw
          3 sites along brow
        local infiltration
        incise lid margin through OOM
        incise brow down to periosteum
          you can wait to make brow incisions if you prefer
          allows you to check position after securing the lid margin
        pass rod sub-OOM from center incision to outer incisions in lid margin
        pull rod up to the brow
        confirm site of medial and lateral brow incisions
        pass the silicone through the preaponeurotic (sub-OOM) space
        anchor the sling to OOM at the medial and lateral incisions
          5-0 Vicryl
        close the lid margin incisions
          6-0 Vicryl
        pass the Silastic from the outer brow incisions to the central one
        secure the rod with a silicone sleeve
          you can tie the sleeve if you want
          harder to adjust later
        adjust height
          adult acquired ptosis
            set the lid at 1-3 mm above the pupil
          congenital ptosis
            set the lid margin even with the limbus
        trim with 8 mm to spare for future adjustment
        protect the cornea after surgery!


//


terminology
  symblepharon
    fusion of the bulbar and palpebral conj
  ankyloblepharon
    fusion of the eyelids
  euryblepharon
    temporal widening of the palpebral fissure
      like someone pulled your outer cheek down
    can happen in blepharophimosis syndrome
  epiblepharon
    pretarsal OOM overrides and turns the lower lashes in
  epicanthus
    tarsalis
      upper eyelid fold
    inversus
      lower eyelid fold
    palpebralis
      evenly distributed upper + lower fold
    supraciliaris
      fold running from the eyebrow to the lacrimal sac


//


from http://www.drdresner.com/ptosis-management/

From an article contributed by Dr. Dresner to the medical textbook Oculoplasty Surgery: The Essentials, edited by William P. Chen. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, 2001.

Ptosis of the upper eyelid is a condition in which the upper eyelid margin is in an abnormal inferiorly displaced position.  It may cover a significant portion of the cornea and pupillary aperture so as to cause visual impairment.  The treatment of ptosis requires accurate and consistent evaluation and measurement as well as skillful use of surgical techniques to implement a functional and esthetic correction.

This article describes evaluation and measurement of ptosis, the corrections for minimal ptosis (Mülllerectomy, Fasanella-Servat procedure), and levator aponeurotic repair for patients with involutional changes.  Frontalis suspension and Whitnall's sling are presented.

EVALUATION OF A PTOSIS PATIENT
The history is important in evaluating the ptosis patient.  If the ptosis is congenital, one should question the patient or family as to the absence or presence of jaw winking.  With acquired ptosis, a history of fatigability would warrant a workup for myasthenia gravis.  Any history of trauma, previous ocular history , or contact lens wear may also be germane.

There are numerous classifications for ptosis, such as congenital versus acquired, neurogenic, myogenic, traumatic, and mechanical.1  None of these classifications, however, provides a practical approach or system for repair.  On a practical basis, ptosis can be viewed as either minimal, moderate, or severe.  A logical system with appropriate choices can then be applied to each of these three categories.

Ocular Exam
In addition to documenting the visual acuity, the patient's ocular motility and pupillary function should be evaluated.  Any anisocoria suspicious for Homer's syndrome should be fully worked up.  The presence or absence of Bell's phenomenon should be documented as well as the tear film and breakup, cornea, and quantitative tear functions.  Children with ptosis should have full-dilated exams, retinoscopy, and assessment of amblyopia.

Ptosis Assessment and Documentation
The amount of ptosis is important to document to the nearest 0.5 mm if possible.  This is better documented by the margin-to-reflex distance 1 (MRD1),2 which is the distance from the central pupillary light reflex to the upper eyelid margin.  The margin-to-reflex distance 2 (MRD2) is the distance from the central pupillary light reflex to the lower eyelid margin.  The MRD1 plus the MRD2 should equal the palpebral fissure measurement.

The levator excursion is the best clinical test of levator function.  The levator excursion is documented in millimeters, measuring the distance from extreme up gaze to downgaze with the brow immobilized by the examiner's thumb to eliminate any contribution of the brow to lid elevation.  A millimeter ruler is used vertically in the pupillary axis to assess the full excursion.  Levator excursion of 10 mm or greater is considered good function, 5 to 9 mm of excursion is fair function, and 4 mm or less is poor function.

Patients with minimal ptosis (2 mm or less) should have a phenylephrine test performed in the involved eye or eyes after appropriate ptosis measurements have been evaluated and documented.  Either 2.5 or 10% phenylephrine is instilled in the affected eye or eyes.  Usually two drops are placed and the patient is reexamined 5 minutes later.  The MRD1 is rechecked in the affected and unaffected eyes . A rise in the MRDl of 1.5 mm or greater is considered a positive test.  This indicates that Müller's muscle is viable, and the Müller's muscle conjunctival resection procedure can be performed.  It may also give the patient a reasonable prediction of the desired result.

The contralateral eye must also be rechecked in patients with unilateral ptosis.  With the ptotic eye occluded, if the MRDl decreases appreciably in the opposite eye, this usually indicates that bilateral ptosis is present, consistent with Hering's law.3  This may necessitate bilateral surgery.  A negative phenylephrine test precludes the use of the Müller's muscle conjunctival procedure because of the unpredictability of the procedure in this setting.2

Callahan and Beard1 have stated that minimal or mild ptosis is 2 mm or less, moderate ptosis is 3 to 4 mm, and severe ptosis is 4 mm or greater.  Usually patients with minimal ptosis will have good levator excursions.  The moderate-ptosis patients usually have good to fair excursion, and, typically, patients with severe ptosis have poor levator excursions.

Surgical Options Based on Levator Function
For patients with minimal ptosis (2 mm or less) there are three viable options: (1) Müller's muscle conjunctival resection, (2) Fasanella-Servat, or (3) levator aponeurotic surgery.  If the phenylephrine test is positive in the affected eyelid or eyelids, the Müller's muscle conjunctival resection procedure is the most precise and predictable surgical option.2  For many ptosis surgeons, this is the preferred approach for minimal ptosis because of its ease, predictability, and the ability to grade the correction.  If, however, the phenylephrine test is negative, one must consider other procedures due to the unpredictability of Müller's muscle conjunctival resection in this setting.  The Fasanella-Servat procedure is the next option that should be considered with minimal ptosis and a negative phenylephrine test.  The Fasanella-Servat procedure, although not quite as predictable as Müller's muscle conjunctival resection, is nearly as predictable and equally easy to perform.4   Because it is in a sense a tarsectomy with little Müller's muscle resected, it is viable in the absence of a positive phenylephrine test.

Levator aponeurotic repair is the third option for minimal ptosis.  Many surgeons prefer this technique because of the ability to set the eyelid height on the operating table.  It is quite useful for patients who have contour abnormalities and who have ptosis requiring concomitant blepharoplasty.5  There are, however, many variables that may affect the results, including the need for patient cooperation, the effects of sedation or local anesthetic infiltration, and the need to overcorrect the affected side or sides on the operating room table.  It is also difficult to grade under general anesthesia.  Indeed, many reports have suggested that predictability and success with this procedure may vary up to within 2 mm of the other affected eyelid.6,7  However, in the setting of minimal ptosis, success ought to be judged to within 0.5 mm.  Nonetheless, levator aponeurotic repair is useful for many minimal ptosis patients.

Levator aponeurotic repair is the treatment of choice for nearly all patients with moderate ptosis.  These patients usually have good to fair levator excursions, and usually have negative phenylephrine tests.

Patients with severe ptosis typically have poor levator excursions and require some type of frontalis suspension.  Patients with unilateral congenital ptosis and levator excursions of only 4 to 5 mm are often helped with Whitnall slings or maximal levator aponeurotic advancement.  This can be augmented by simultaneous tarsectomy as well.

Bilateral severe ptosis patients, or patients with very poor levator excursion, need some type of frontalis suspension.  Congenital severe ptosis with little levator excursion is best served with autogenous fascia lata grafts.  Nonautogenous materials are available and can be used if necessary; however, the long-term results are poorer than with autogenous materials.8  Acquired severe ptosis, such as seen with third nerve palsy, progressive external ophthalmoplegia, or oculopharyngeal dystrophy, is best treated by frontalis suspension using a silicone (Silastic) rod because of its adjustability and the possibility for subsequent removal if the cornea becomes compromised.9

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
Müller's Muscle Conjunctival Resection
Müller's muscle conjunctival resection is reserved for patients with minimal ptosis (2 mm or less) with normal levator excursion and a positive phenylephrine test.  This technique was originally described by Putterman and Urist10 in 1975.  Various modifications have been described to modify this technique.2,11

Müller's muscle is a smooth muscle that originates from the undersurface of the levator and inserts with a 0.5 to 1 mm tendon into the superior tarsal plate12  When denervated in Horner's syndrome, this muscle relaxes, causing 2 to 3 mm of clinical blepharoptosis.  The levator aponeurosis has been shown to insert on the anterior 7 to 8 mm of the upper tarsus, with additional interdigitations to the orbicularis oculi's intermuscular septum, forming the eyelid crease.13  Whitnall, however, recognized Müller's muscle as another important primary attachment or insertion of the levator.  When Müller's muscle is advanced, it strengthens the posterior lamella and appears to plicate the levator aponeurosis with healing and subsequent scarring in the posterior lamella.  This plication is successful in maintaining a permanent elevated position of the upper eyelid.2

Surgical Technique

A frontal nerve block is unnecessary for this procedure; lor 2% Xylocaine is used as a regional block for the upper eyelid.  Epinephrine is omitted to avoid stimulation of Müller's muscle; 2 to 3 cc of the solution mixed with hyaluronidase (10 cc anesthetic mixed with 150 units hyaluronidase Wydase) is injected just below the superior orbital rim.  Tetracaine topical anesthetic eye drops are then placed on the conjunctival surface.  A 4-0 silk suture is placed through the tarsus at the eyelid margin in the pupillary axis.  The eyelid is reflected over a Desmarres retractor.  Marks are made at one-half the distance of the total resection amount medially, centrally, and laterally, measured with a caliper and beginning 0.5 mm above the tarsal plate.  Another mark is made centrally to measure the total extent of resection desired.4

Three 4-0 silk traction sutures are placed through the conjunctiva and Müller's muscle centrally, medially, and laterally at the halfway marks.  Each bite is approximately 3 mm long and deep to the underlying Müller's muscle, but should not penetrate the levator aponeurosis or orbicularis muscle.  The sutures are separated into two bundles and tied on themselves, to be used as traction sutures to elevate the required amount of conjunctiva and Müller's muscle to be resected .5

The Desmarres retractor is removed and the lid marginal suture is clamped superiorly to the head drape.  The bundles of sutures are elevated.  One bundle is held by the surgeon and the other by an assistant.  The Müller's muscle conjunctival resection clamp (Karl Ilg Instruments, Villa Park, IL) is placed over the elevated tissues.  The clamp is placed so that the most superior central mark is adjacent to the resection clamp.

A 6-0 plain suture is placed under the clamp with a horizontal mattress technique approximately 0.5 to 1 mm below the clamp .  The clamp tissues are excised with a no.15 blade, metal on metal .  The conjunctiva is closed with a running baseball stitch in the reverse direction of the original pass.  The suture is tied on itself . Exteriorizing the suture is not required.  The eyelid is returned to its anatomic position and the eyelid margin suture is removed.  Antibiotic ointment is placed in the eye.  No patch is necessary.

Excellent results can be seen with minimal ptosis ranging between 1 and 2 mm .  The advantages of this technique are that it is quick, predictable, and quantifiable.  Late failures are quite rare.

Complications include a rare superior corneal abrasion, undercorrection, or overcorrection.  Usually an abrasion heals spontaneously if it is small.  A bandage contact lens can also be placed if desired.  Overcorrection is rare with this technique.  If it occurs, the plain suture can be cut under topical anesthetic in the office, and the wound can be separated gently with a cotton swab.  Undercorrection requires another procedure at a later date.

FasaneIla-Servat Procedure
In 1961 Fasanella and Servat described their tarsectomy operation for correcting small amounts of ptosis in patients with normal levator function.  In 1972 Putterman14 developed a clamp to supplant the use of curved hemostats for the Fasanella-Servat procedure.  This clamp is best known today for its use in the Müller's muscle conjunctival resection procedure.  The Fasanella-Servat procedure is well suited for minimal ptosis.  Because patients with a positive phenylephrine test are treated with a Müller's muscle conjunctival resection procedure, the Fasanella is reserved for patients with minimal ptosis and a negative phenylephrine test who do not require blepharoplasty.

Surgical Technique

Fasanella and Servat described performing their procedure with two curved hemostats.  Placing these hemostats can be cumbersome, and malplacement can lead to postoperative contour abnormalities or central peaking.  A modified Putterman clamp (Karl Ilg) can be used in place of the two hemostats .  This clamp is modified with a screw closure, which assists in crushing the tarsus.

Anesthesia is obtained by injecting 1% Xylocaine with 1:100,000 dilution epinephrine and hyaluronidase through the superior cul-de-sac.  The eyelid is everted and two 4-0 silk sutures are placed through the conjunctival tarsal border medially and laterally .  The tarsus is marked centrally along the pupillary axis, measuring the proposed resection amount.  One millimeter of tarsus should be resected for each millimeter of ptosis.  The tissues are elevated via the two traction sutures and the clamp is placed over the tarsus and conjunctiva .  The screw device is turned until the tissues are firmly secured.  A 6-0 polypropylene (Prolene) suture is placed through the anterior lamella under the clamp, then passed back and forth in a horizontal mattress fashion and exteriorized out the anterior skin lamella at the other end of the clamp.14  The clamped tissues are excised with a no.15 blade .  The eyelid is reflected back in its anatomic position and the suture is tied over itself along the pretarsal area.  The suture is removed in 5 to 7 days.

Although this procedure is not as predictable as the Müller's muscle conjunctival resection procedure, it is nearly so, and can yield excellent results in patients who have 1 to 2 mm of ptosis .  Correction of 3 mm of ptosis is not recommended with this procedure because of the need to excise large amounts of tarsus.

Complications include undercorrection, overcorrection, and the rare corneal epithelial defect.  Overcorrections can usually be treated by early removal of the suture and by digital massage.  Undercorrections will need either a full-thickness eyelid resection or a levator aponeurotic repair.

This procedure can be performed on patients with or without positive phenylephrine tests; however, patients with a positive phenylephrine test are usually better served with Müller's muscle conjunctival resection.  The advantages of this modified Fasanella-Servat technique include avoiding the need for two hemostats, the absence of contour abnormalities, and the ability to quantitate the procedure well.

Levator Aponeurotic Repair
Levator aponeurotic repair is useful for minimal to moderate ptosis and can be employed if Müller's muscle conjunctival resection or Fasanella-Servat are not indicated, such as in patients with a large conjunctival filtering bleb or when concomitant blepharoplasty is desired.  For moderate ptosis (3 to 4 mm), it is the procedure of choice.  A maximallevator aponeurotic advancement or Whitnall sling can be employed for patients with severe unilateral ptosis.  This can be further augmented by excising additional amounts of tarsus to elevate the eyelid margin.

The levator palpebral superioris extends from the annulus of Zinn posteriorly through the superior orbit to Whitnall's ligament, which serves as a suspensory ligament for the upper eyelid . At this point the muscle becomes aponeurotic and whitish in appearance.  The aponeurosis courses downward to insert on the inferior two thirds of the anterior surface of the tarsal plate, the fibrous septi of the orbicularis and the subcutaneous tissues.15  Further anterior to the aponeurosis is the pre-aponeurotic fat pad and the orbital septum.

Surgical Technique

The procedure is best performed under local anesthetic with minimal intravenous sedation.  Small amounts of local anesthetic are used to avoid paralyzing the levator muscle.  Epinephrine is recommended for adequate hemostasis.  Approximately 1 to 2 cc of 1% Xylocaine with epinephrine is usually sufficient.

The eyelid crease is marked prior to local infiltration.  If unilateral ptosis is to be performed, the incision is marked approximately 1 mm below the crease on the opposite eyelid, because postoperatively the crease will rise slightly.  If bilateral surgery is planned, the incision can be symmetrically placed at the desired location, but placing the incision too high beyond the superior tarsal border of the upper tarsus should be avoided.

After the local anesthetic is injected on the lid, topical tetracaine eye drops are placed on the conjunctival surface.  The patient is prepped, and protective corneal shields can be placed over the globes.  The incision can be made with a no.15 Bard-Parker blade or a CO2 laser set to incisional mode.  A skin-muscle flap is developed to expose the orbital septum.  The septum is incised over the upper one third to avoid incising or damaging the underlying levator .21  The preaponeurotic fat pad is reflected upward and the whitish aponeurosis is seen underneath.  A high-temperature hand-held cautery is used to disinsert the aponeurosis from the tarsal plate, which separates the aponeurosis from the underlying Müller's muscle .  Dissection is carried upward, as high as Whitnall's ligament if necessary.  A double-arm 6-0 Vicryl suture is placed partial thickness through the central portion of the upper tarsus in two 3 mm bites.  This suture is then taken up through the aponeurosis at the desired height .  This is temporarily tied and the level is examined.  Usually sitting the patient up on the table gives a more accurate assessment.  A 1 to 1.5 mm overcorrection is desirable, because the protractors (orbicularis) are paralyzed by local anesthetic and there can be some stimulation of Müller's muscle by the epinephrine.  Additional sutures can be placed medially and laterally for contour adjustment; however, often they are unnecessary.  The excess levator aponeurosis is trimmed.  A strip of skin-orbicularis flap superiorly can be excised if necessary, or bilateral blepharoplasties can be performed with this surgical technique.  The wound is then closed with a 6-0 suture of choice with supratarsal fixation on every other bite of the suture.  Excellent results can be obtained with this approach.

Whitnall Sling
The Whitnall sling procedure is a maximal levator aponeurotic advancement.  In actuality, the levator muscle's Whitnall's ligament is sewn to the superior tarsal plate without cutting the medial and lateral horns of the levator and aponeurosis.  This is usually utilized in unilateral congenital ptosis with levator function in the 5 mm range.

Surgical Technique

Because this technique is often performed under general anesthesia, an empirical formula needs to be used to set the height of the lid margin.  The gaping technique described by McCord16 suggests that in congenital ptosis, one adds 3 mm to the amount of ptosis present and that this amount of gaping or lagophthalmos is established on the operating table.  For instance, if there is 3 mm of ptosis present, the eyes should be left open 6 mm on the operating table.  Another formula is to subtract the levator excursion in the affected eyelid from the normal side of excursion.  This number is then multiplied by 1.2 to identify the amount of levator aponeurotic advancement.  For example, if one side has an excursion of 6 mm and the other side is 14 mm, then the levator is advanced 9.6mm.

If additional elevation is required, a tarsectomy can be performed at the time of Whitnall's sling.  2 to 4 mm of tarsus can be excised at the time of surgery.  With this method, each millimeter of tarsus is equivalent to 2 mm of aponeurotic advancement.

Complications with aponeurotic surgery include contour abnormalities, overcorrection, and undercorrection. Conjunctival prolapse is rare.  These complications are usually best addressed 1 week postsurgery.7  With overcorrections, the wound can be opened and the aponeurotic sutures cut.  The aponeurosis is recessed slightly with cotton swabs and the eyelid level is reassessed.  Undercorrections are opened and the aponeurosis adyanced appropriately.  Contour abnormalities are handled in a similar fashion.

Frontalis Suspension Using Fascia Lata
Patients with severe ptosis and poor levator function are candidates for frontalis suspension with autogenous fascia lata.  Patients with synkinetic ptosis (Marcus-Gunn jaw-winking ptosis) may also be candidates for this procedure with or without levator extirpation.  Generally, autogenous fascia lata gives more predictable and long-lasting results.7  Eye-bank-preserved tissues can be utilized when the patient is younger than 3 years of age or at the family's request.

Autogenous fascia lata is easy to harvest freehand, obviating the need for fascial strippers.  A 3 to 4 cm incision is marked in the midthigh longitudinally, halfway between the head of the fibula and the anterior superior iliac spine .  Although this procedure is usually performed under general anesthesia, 0.5% Marcaine with 1:100,000 dilution epinephrine is injected subcutaneously for hemostasis and postoperatively analgesia.  The foot is pronated slightly by a nonscrubbed assistant or can be taped to immobilize the leg and place the fascia lata on stretch.  The incision is begun with a no.15 Bard-Parker blade, and dissection is carried down through the subcutaneous fat to the fascia.  For bilateral surgery , a harvested strip of fascia needs to be at least 6 mm in width and 8 to 10 cm in length.  Two incisions are made 8 to 10 cm apart into the fascia with a no.15 Bard-Parker blade.  The fascia is exposed superiorly and inferiorly by dissecting bluntly with small "peanuts" (small wrapped cotton balls).  A surgical assistant moves along the incisions with army-navy retractors to expose the field.  Using long Metzenbaum scissors, the fascial strips are incised lengthwise.  The strip is transected on both ends with curved scissors or Jorgenson's scissors, and pulled out of the wound.  The fascia lata is not repaired.  The subcutaneous tissues are closed with 4-0 or 5-0 Vicryl sutures, and the skin can be closed with a 5-0 plain suture.

Surgical Technique

A number of patterns for frontalis suspensions have been described.  A simple pentangular pattern is useful for both fascia lata and silicone rod and requires a limited length of material.

Local anesthetic with epinephrine is injected pretarsally and to the suprabrow region.  Two incisions are marked adjacent to the medial and lateral corneal limbus over the midtarsus.  Three-millimeter incisions are made down to the tarsal plate.  A 2 to 3 mm width fascial strip is then pulled through the incisions with a Wright fascia lata needle.  The fascial strips can be pulled upward to the medial and lateral eyebrow to mark the two brow incisions, ensuring a proper vector and eyelid contour.  The medial and lateral suprabrow incisions are incised down to the periosteum with a no.15 Bard-Parker blade.  While the globe is protected by a lid plate, a Wright needle is passed downward from the medial and lateral brow incisions through the preaponeurotic fat pads to the lid incisions.  The fascia strip is then pulled through the medial and lateral brow incisions.  It is then crossed centrally over the pupil to mark the central incision, at a point 4 to 5 mm above the two incisions.  The central incision is made down to the periosteum and the two ends of the fascial strip are tunneled into the central incision with the Wright needle.  This approach helps to ensure the proper vectors of pull and a normal eyelid contour.  The fascia is pulled up until the lid margin approximates the upper limbus and is then tied with one half of a surgeon's knot.  A 6-0 Prolene suture or braided nylon suture is sewn through the knotted strips and tied, securing the knot.  It is then sewn into the frontalis muscles superiorly.  Excess fascia is trimmed, and 4 to 5 mm of remnant fascia is tucked into the central incision.  The lid and brow incisions are then closed with 6-0 plain suture.

Variation

A variation of this technique can be performed by making a lid crease incision and sewing the fascia directly to the tarsal plate.  This is helpful in some instances when one wants to excise excess skin or to provide a more defined lid crease.  The pretarsal incision technique described previously, however, is faster and creates an appropriate upper eyelid crease.

Frontalis Suspension Using a Silicone (Silastic) Rod
Silicone (Silastic) rod suspension is useful in myogenic ptosis conditions such as progressive external ophthalmoplegia, oculopharyngeal dystrophy, and myasthenia gravis, or in third nerve palsy patients.  Rarely, an adult with severe bilateral congenital ptosis with no previous surgical correction or with undercorrection from previous surgeries may present with absent or poor Bell's protective eye phenomenon.  These patients are usually better served with silicone rod frontalis suspension.

Silicone rod frontalis suspension is recommended in patients with progressive neuromuscular disorders and third nerve palsy because of the possibility of recovery of illness, possible favorable response to therapeutics, and allowance for postoperative adjustment.  The 1 mm solid silicone (Silastic) rods are available commercially .  The Silastic rod package comes with passing needles and Silastic sleeve, which eliminate the need for the Wright fascia lata needle.

Surgical Technique

The surgery can be done under general anesthesia or local anesthesia; however local anesthesia is preferred to fine-tune the eyelid level and contour intraoperatively.  A simple pentangular design similar to what is used for the fascial frontalis suspension works well for this procedure.  A lid crease incision, however, is more appropriate in this case to attach the silicone rod directly to the tarsal plate.

One percent Xylocaine with epinephrine and hyaluronidase is injected under the lid crease incision and just above the eyebrow centrally, medially, and laterally.  The lid crease incision is made and the tarsal plate is exposed by dissection through the orbicularis.  The silicone rod is sewn onto the tarsal plate with three to five interrupted 6-0 braided nylon or polypropylene .  The rod is then pulled up to the eyebrow to mark the medial and lateral brow incisions.  This will help to optimize the contour of the upper eyelid margin.  Incisions are made down to the periosteum.  With the globe protected, the rods are passed through the preaponeurotic space to the medial and lateral brow incisions with the passing needles .  The medial and lateral ends of the Silastic rod are then pulled up and crossed centrally to mark the central incision.  This is usually above the pupil or just medial to the pupil.  The two ends of the rod are passed through a small Silastic sleeve to secure them at an optimum length and tension.  The lid level is set between 1 and 3 mm above the pupil, depending on the condition being treated.  (One should not elevate these lids to the limbus, as one does with congenital ptosis.)  The rods are trimmed and left with 5 to 8 mm of length on either end for possible future adjustment.  The ends of these rods are then tucked into the wound.  A 6-0 braided nylon or polypropylene suture is sewn around the sleeve, which is then sewn superiorly to the deeper frontalis muscle .  The brow incisions are closed and the lid crease incision is closed, usually with supratarsal fixation every other bite to create a defined lid crease.  One can adjust the lid level and contour postoperatively in the office by exposing the Silastic sleeve under the central suprabrow incision.  This is best done within the first few weeks after surgery because once a pseudocapsule forms around the rods, adjustment may be more difficult.  If indicated, the rod can be entirely removed at any time postoperatively.  The Silastic rod offers the extra advantage and flexibility of adjustability, and comparable results to fascia lata techniques can be obtained.
