questions

2010 S2P1Q1
  Is it appropriate to mention UGH as a DDx here despite high-normal IOP and no mention of hyphaema?
  could be an intermittent issue, closed loop ACIOL is a risk factor etc.


2010 S2P2Q1
  vernal KC with shield ulcer
  Given a relatively classic scenario, would you expect the candidate to mention ruling out an infectious cause, or should they simply recognise this as a shield ulcer and go straight to treatment.

  if AC reaction or infiltrate then scrape otherwise just q1h topical steroids
  PF dex minims
  if do end up doing a GA then DEBRIDE the ulcer which helps healing - you could send this for a scrape anyway - use a sterile burr

  most improve but some go on to atopic KC - look this up

  How early in the course would you consider supratarsal triamcinolone? What about topical cyclosporine or tacrolimus?


2011 S1P2Q6
  FED
  What is the local philosophy on combined DMEK + PKE/IOL vs cataract only and watch?

  In the absence of cataract, approximately what VA would you start to think about DMEK?


2011 S1P2Q6
  KCN
  Pt. presents with 62 D cone RE - I mentioned RGP CTL but how likely is the patient to succeed at fitting with a cornea in that range?

  Generally for crosslinking I've been told they should have CCT 400 µm and no previous hydrops (no central scarring). If they have 400 µm is there a steepness of VA cutoff where you would refuse crosslinking?

  Is it wrong to mention crosslinking if you don't have serial exams to document progression?

by definition - KCN criteria means the pt has irregular astigmatism

2011 S1P2Q8
  microbial keratitis after LASIK
  This patient has an epithelial defect over the infiltrate - would you always lift the flap in the OT to scrape the stromal bed, or in the presence of an epi defect would you consider doing a direct scrape in clinic?


2014 S1P2Q12
  Which specific aspect of this question aims to test our recognition of preservative toxicity? Worsening of the neurotrophic component, rolled borders?

2015s1p2q10
  STATE to avoid eye rubbing
  serial MRx can help confirm progression
  if you do crosslinking on cornea that's too thin the endothelium is at risk

OSSN
  ALWAYS: confirm diagnosis with impression cytology
    this doesn't give depth so you don't know if it's invasive or just dysplasia
  chemoreduction more important in large lesions ~ 4 CH to prevent LSCD with resection - need about 2 mm margins ± cryo - if it's small you can just go straight for excision if you want || treat with chemoreduction only and see if it goes away. some people do week on week off given the toxicity and risk of LSCD from the chemo - also risk of punctal stenosis (not common)
  generally here in melbourne they just excise rather than performing incisional biopsy.

no one in australasia uses the K-pro so generally experience with kpro is limited

LSCD
  autograft
    once host eye no longer inflamed
  allografts do poorly generally (from cadaveric donor)
  e.g. aniridia both eyes affected so autograft may not be an option

infectious crystalline keratopathy
  tim: do you continue steroids along with antibiotic treatment?
  need to balance with graft rejection - depends on severity of infection and state of graft

always do viral swabs in K ulcers

dsek triple slightly higher failure rate of dsek
generally the view is to try to do the cataract first
  unless there is frank bullae or a legit decompensated cornea

generally dmek is not being done in oz - better off mentioning dsek and just aim myopic with PKE/IOL to compensate for the hyperopic shift

almost always do a scrape in PUK - you're going to treat with steroids
mainstay of treatment for scleral and corneal melts assoc with autoimmune dz is systemic treatment

pain after dsek
  high pressure
    pupillary block from the bubble
    mitigating options
      preop yag
      postop dilating drops
      SPI - can bleed though
    treat
      medically
      burp in an emergency
  epi defect


