What does AREDS 2 mean for my patients?Dusty Pomerleau, MDThe Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) 1,2 was undertaken to supplement knowledge gained in the original AREDS study.3 The study evaluated 3 new compounds (lutein, zeaxanthin, and Ω-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFAs) in the form of docosahexaenoic acid [DHA] and eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA]) in addition to the previous components of the AREDS formula (vitamin C, vitamin E, ß-carotene, zinc, and copper). The study enrolled 4203 participants between the ages of 50 and 85 who were considered to be at high risk for late AMD (bilateral large drusen ≥ 125 µm (~ width of a vein at the disc margin), or large drusen in the study eye with late AMD in the fellow eye). Although the study aimed primarily to assess the benefit of carotenoids (lutein and zeaxanthin) with or without Ω-3 LCPUFAs on progression to late AMD (GA or CNV), groups were also designed to test whether ß-carotene could be safely eliminated from the formulation, and whether the dose of zinc could be reduced. The desire to reduce ß-carotene exposure was driven by data suggesting that smokers taking ß-carotene have an increased risk of lung carcinoma, and concern that multiple formulations (smokerÕs formulation vs. original formulation) led to unnecessary confusion and potential harm for patients. Although the dose of zinc in AREDS1 (80 mg) was not thought to be harmful, a reduced zinc dose was tested because dietary analyses suggested 25 mg to be the maximum absorbable dose.The study design required 2 separate randomizations Ð patients were first randomized to groups with various combinations of lutein, zeaxanthin, and Ω-3 LCPUFAs. The second randomization involved modifying the doses of ß-carotene and zinc in the original AREDS1 formula. Patients were allowed to opt out of the second randomization by taking no AREDS vitamins at all, or by taking the standard AREDS1 formula. The groups looked like this:First randomization (n = 4203):1.  placebo (1012)2.  lutein 10 mg, zeaxanthin 2 mg (1044)3.  Ω-3 LCPUFAs [DHA 350 mg, EPA 650 mg] (1068)4.  lutein, zeaxanthin, and Ω-3 LCPUFAs (1079)The patients were then pooled again before the second randomization (n = 4203):1.  patient opt-out: no AREDS vitamins (19)2.  patient opt-out: standard AREDS1 vitamins (1148)3.  randomized: standard AREDS1 vitamins (659)4.  randomized: AREDS formulation, no ß-carotene (863)5.  randomized: AREDS formulation, reduced zinc (689)6.  randomized: AREDS formulation, no ß-carotene and reduced zinc (825)The double-randomization allowed all possible permutations of the supplements to be tested. After extensive subgroup analyses the conclusions were as follows:1.  Addition of lutein/zeaxanthin, Ω-3 LCPUFAs, or both did not reduce progression to advanced AMD when compared to standard AREDS1 vitamins.2.  Elimination of ß-carotene had no discernible effect on progression to late AMD. The increased risk of lung cancer in former smokers was confirmed.3.  Reduction of zinc from 80 mg to 25 mg had no discernible effect on progression to late AMD.Trends in the data led to recommendations that were not intuitively obvious to those outside the study group. Much additional study is needed. With that in mind, what were the final recommendations?1.  Patients with at least 1 large druse (>125 µm) bilaterally, or with 1 large druse and late AMD in the fellow eye (GA, CNV) should be placed on AREDS2 vitamins.2.  The AREDS2 formulation should consist of: lutein 10 mg, zeaxanthin 2 mg, vitamin C 500 mg, vitamin E 400 IU, cupric oxide 2 mg, zinc oxide 80 mg or 25 mg, with or without DHA 350 mg, EPA 650 mg.a. Why include lutein and zeaxanthin when no clear benefit was shown? The study group felt that ß-carotene may have been involved in competitive inhibition of lutein and zeaxanthin uptake (there was a trend toward greater protection of lutein/zeaxanthin in patients who were not taking ß-carotene). Given that the risk of ß-carotene to smokers has now been replicated in multiple studies, the investigators recommended that lutein/zeaxanthin be used as a carotenoid replacement for ß-carotene in all formulations until further studies can be performed.b. Why not give a clear recommendation on zinc? There simply wasnÕt enough data to make a recommendation for or against reduced zinc. Given that most dietary studies show maximal daily uptake of zinc < 40 mg, most formulations have chosen to reduce the zinc to 25 mg, and this is what I recommend to my own patients.c. Why make Ω-3 LCPUFAs optional if no clear benefit was shown? Although the study group was not able to detect a benefit to DHA/EPA, the cardiovascular benefits are well known, and it is thought that ophthalmic benefits might have been detected with greater sample size and study power. Given that no harm has been shown, many formulations have chosen to include DHA/EPA. I encourage my own patients to take Ω-3 LCPUFAs for their non-retinal benefits, regardless of whether they take them as a component of their AREDS2 vitamins.1. Chew EY, Clemons T, SanGiovanni JP, et al. The Age-related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2). OPHTHA 2012;119:2282Ð2289.2. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Research Group*. LuteinÊ+ÊZeaxanthin and Omega-3 Fatty Acids for Age-Related Macular Degeneration: The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2013:1Ð11.3. AREDS Research Group. A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E, beta carotene, and zinc for age-related macular degeneration and vision loss: AREDS report no. 8. Arch Ophthalmol 2001;119:1417Ð1436.