// https://github.com/dustypomerleau/eye-notes

//... format to match eye-notes style

UKMi Q&A 158.4

Does the dose of intravenous fluorescein sodium need to be adjusted in renal impairment or renal replacement therapy?

Prepared by UK Medicines Information (UKMi) pharmacists for NHS healthcare professionals
Date prepared: 23rd May 2012

Background

Fluorescein sodium is given by intravenous (IV) injection for the examination of the ophthalmic vasculature by retinal angiography. The usual dose is the equivalent of 500mg of fluorescein, as a solution of fluorescein 10% or 25%., for example 5 mL of a fluorescein 10% solution as an IV bolus( , , ). A 10% solution of fluorescein (as 566mg fluorescein sodium in 5mL) is available as a licensed product in the UK (3).

Answer
There is little useful data available for patients with renal insufficiency and patients undergoing renal replacement therapies receiving fluorescein sodium.
Although fluorescein sodium and its metabolites are almost entirely excreted in the urine, there has not been an increased incidence of adverse effects reported to date in patients with renal insufficiency (2,). Because it is administered as a single dose, accumulation should not be a problem. The half-life is short; half-lives of fluorescein and fluorescein glucuronide in plasma are approximately 24 and 264 minutes, respectively (2,4). After IV administration, the urine remains slightly fluorescent for 24 to 36 hours. The systemic clearance of fluorescein is essentially complete by 48 to 72 hours after administration of 500 mg fluorescein. Although a longer excretion rate in patients with renal impairment is possible, limited experience in renally impaired subjects (glomerular filtration rate below 20 ml/min) suggests that, in general, no dose adjustment is required in patients with renal insufficiency undergoing retinal angiography with usual doses of fluorescein sodium (2,3, ,). The Royal College of Ophthalmologists guidelines for the management of age-related macular degeneration refer to the use of fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and note that renal disease is not a reason to withhold FFA. They advise however that the presence of renal disease should be recorded in case of any subsequent patient management issues( ).
There are some case reports and observational studies on small numbers of patients, of the use of fluorescein for retinal angiography in patients with varying degrees of renal impairment; these include patients on hemodialysis. However, most of these reports do not specify the dose used or mention dose adjustment ( , , , , ). In a retrospective cohort study, 2.5mL of 10% sodium fluorescein solution was given IV to 128 diabetic patients with an eGFR <60mL/min per 1.73m2 undergoing fluorescein angiography to assess retinopathy. There was no significant change in eGFR from baseline following fluorescein angiography overall, and also in a subgroup analysis by CKD stage; (90, 28 and 10 patients had stage 3, 4 and 5 CKD respectively)( ). In a prospective cohort study 44 diabetic patients (eGFR not stated) undergoing fluorescein angiography to assess retinopathy received 500mg sodium fluorescein solution IV. Mean serum creatinine increased from 1.09 mg/dl (96.3 micromol/L) at baseline to 1.16 mg/dl (102.5 micromol/L) at day 3 after angiography. No significant adverse effects were observed ( ).There is limited evidence however, that fluorescein may interfere with certain laboratory tests including estimation of serum creatinine (3, ).

Dialysis
The manufacturer of Anatera 100mg/ml recommends reducing the dose to 250mg in dialysed patients (3).

 Hemodialysis (HD)
Fluorescein sodium is highly protein bound (70-80%) (4), which does not favor removal by HD. However, it has a low molecular weight (MW) and low volume of distribution (Vd) (0.5 to 0.8L/kg)(4), which are both characteristics that favor removal by HD. Fluorescein sodium is water-soluble which would favor removal by an aqueous dialysate.(1,2, , ) It is therefore difficult to predict how much could be removed by HD. However due to the short half-life and the fact that it is a single dose, accumulation should not be a problem in hemodialysis patients.

 Continuous Ambulatory Peritoneal Dialysis (CAPD)
Fluorescein sodium’s low MW and low Vd favor removal by CAPD, but its high protein binding does not (15). It is therefore difficult to predict how much could be removed by CAPD. However due to the short half-life and the fact that it is a single dose, accumulation should not be a problem in CAPD patients.

Continuous arterio-venous or veno-venous hemofiltration/hemodialysis/ hemodiafiltration
 (CAVH/CAVHD/CAVHDF) or (CVVH/CVVHD/CVVHDF)
Fluorescein sodium’s low Vd favors removal by filtration/diafiltration. The filters can remove only non-protein bound drug and fluorescein sodium is highly protein bound. Its low MW will allow passage through the large pore size filters but again it is difficult to predict how much removal is likely to take place (15).  Fluorescein sodium’s short half-life and the fact that it is a single dose should mean that accumulation should not be a problem in patients on filtration/diafiltration.

Summary
Whilst limited data are available, it does not appear that dose adjustments are required in patients with renal impairment undergoing retinal angiography with usual doses of fluorescein sodium. The manufacturer recommends reducing the dose to 250mg in dialysed patients.

Limitations
There is little useful data available for patients with renal insufficiency and patients undergoing renal replacement therapies receiving fluorescein sodium, therefore these recommendations are based on theoretical considerations.

Disclaimer
• Medicines Q&As are intended for healthcare professionals and reflect UK practice.
• Each Q&A relates only to the clinical scenario described.
• Q&As are believed to accurately reflect the medical literature at the time of writing.
• The authors of Medicines Q&As are not responsible for the content of external websites and links are made available solely to indicate their potential usefulness to users of NeLM. You must use your judgement to determine the accuracy and relevance of the information they contain.
• This document is intended for use by NHS healthcare professionals and cannot be used for commercial or marketing purposes.
• See www.ukmi.nhs.uk/activities/medicinesQAs/default.asp for full disclaimer.



References
