// https://github.com/dustypomerleau/eye-notes

// This file is specific to the Australian RACE exam.

"That thing that wasn't the thing I thought of is the most ridiculous thing in
the universe!" --Every RACE examiner, ever.
The mind reading component is part of the test. It's a game, treat it as such.
You have to guess what they want. Accept that guessing correctly is a skill
you need to acquire, and hone it well. There *are* patterns and this *is*
learnable.

Your guiding principle for all questions:
  "What would I actually do for this patient in the clinic?"
    They are expecting this question to be answered.
  You pass the question by saying the right things
    There are *no bonus points* for things that are not on the marking sheet

For each question, start with a template
  What is the diagnosis?
    if you aren't sure
      circle demographics and buzzwords
  Where's the money?
    put a $ next to the part of the question that needs most attention
      don't spend all day on part A if part B is the $
  What bad stuff is related to that diagnosis?
    important rule-out on the differential
    ocular complication - can blind you
    medical complication - can kill you
      for each bad thing
        distinguishing history
        unique exam finding
        ancillary test that will rule it out
        investigation that will rule it out
        treatment that will prevent it
    For every question about a patient over 50
      determine if GCA could cause the problem and test for it
      they will probably give you someone 70+ but don't rely on that
  What is the most common item from each DDx category?
    you've already listed the stuff that can kill or blind you
    now list the stuff that *usually* causes the problem
    write the category first, and then write the common diagnosis within it
      this demonstrates that you are describing a basket of possibilities
    very long DDx (or lists of any kind) will not help you on the RACE
      if they ask for 3
        give them your best 3 and then move on
      when studying
        don't waste your time on extensive lists
          if you are a naturally thorough person, this will require discipline
        a memorized, organized, instantly accessible shortlist will pass
        a half-forgotten, disorganized, long list will fail (and eat up time)
      any type of list on the RACE scores better if
        you only list the 3 things the examiner is thinking of
        AOT
          listing 10 things
          3 things the examiner wants are on there, but
            you don't list them until the end
            examiner thinks stuff at the top of the list is foolishness
          examiner decides you don't know your stuff even though you are right
  when you've finished with your DDx
    what did they tell you in the question that would rule those items out
    if the patient can't have a particular diagnosis
      explain that OR don't list it
  if they only give you information about 1 eye
    STATE that you would examine both eyes
  in the clinic
    what would you do for this specific patient?
    *find a way* to include those tests or therapies
    the question might be worded imperfectly but they're expecting these things
  if you are describing a procedure
    before you describe the steps
      consent the patient
        biggest surgical risks
        main reasons patients are unhappy
          even if you don't think of these as 'risks'
        specific risks for the case presented
      mention standard aseptic prep
    after you describe the steps
      describe your postop medication regimen
      describe your follow up interval
        a good time for if-then statements
  counsel the patient and family
  make appropriate referrals to other disciplines
    at a minimum
      include the GP in any systemic disease
        ALWAYS: refer for improved control of DM, HTN, chol, etc.

  when writing the answer out
    first list the diagnosis (if it is clear cut)
    then list key issues to be dealt with
    then begin answering part A


//


VSAQ

Allot 30 min for 60 questions @ 30 sec/Q


SAQ

Allot 15 min for each of 8 SAQ and be strict about time.
Organize under sub-headings within your answer if possible.
Average answer length 2-3 pages.
Practice past papers in entirety with time constraints.


While grading examiners make the following points:

1. Did the candidate answer the question? A generic essay on thyroid eye
disease is inadequate if the question is all about elevated IOP in a thyroid
patient. This is a common and frustrating problem.

2. Did the candidate display adequate knowledge? Did the candidate convince
the examiner he/she was capable of managing this particular problem?

3. Did the candidate show appropriate perspective? Not doing so might mean
he/she stressed an unlikely aspect of the problem instead of the more obvious
or more common one. It might also mean requesting a host of unnecessary tests
or failing to document why certain examinations or tests are necessary. You
must justify everything in relation to the particular patient you are being
asked about so long lists without focusing on their relevance are frowned upon
and will count against you.

For disease X,
What is the relevant history (meds, family, social, symptoms etc.)
What are the risk factors that need to be queried
What is the differential of the condition
What are the appropriate clinical exams to diagnose the condition
What ancillary testing is needed to diagnose or treat the condition
What investigations are needed to diagnose or treat the condition
What factors need to be addressed in terms of impact on the patient (genetic counseling, ADLs)

With respect to overall performance:

A pass grade for the exam is therefore 37/46 for the writtens and 15/18 for
the OSCE. A candidate who is borderline in the writtens (32-36/40) but does
particularly well in the OSCE (>16/18) will still pass the whole exam.


//


OSCE
  avoid 'of course,' 'obviously'
